1 
  
 
 
 
Critical Thinking  
 
Mark Storey  
Bellevue College  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright (c) 2013 Mark Storey  
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document  
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3  
or any later vers ion published by the Free Software Foundation;  
with no Invariant Sections, no Front -Cover Texts, and no Back -Cover Texts.  
A copy of the license is found at http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.txt . 
2 
    
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
 Part 1   
 Chapter 1: Thinking Critically abou t the Logic of Arguments  .. 3 
 Chapter 2 : Deduction and  Inducti on …………  ………………. 10 
 Chapter 3: Evaluating Deductive  Arguments  ……………... …. 16 
 Chapter 4: Evaluating Inductive  Arguments ………… ..……… 24 
 Chapter 5: Deductive Soundness  and Inductive Cogency  ….…. 29 
 Chapter 6: The Coun terexample Method ……………………... 33 
 
 Part 2  
 Chapter 7:  Fallacies ………………….………….……………. 43 
 Chapter 8: Argu ments from Analogy ………………………… 75 
 
 Part 3  
 Chapter 9: Catego rical Patterns….…….………….…………… 86 
 Chapter 10: Proposi tional Patterns……. .….…………... ……… 116 
 
 Part 4  
 Chapter 11: Causal Arguments....……..………….…… …....…. 143 
 Chapter 12: Hypotheses.….……………………… ………….… 159 
 Chapter 13: D efinitions and Analyses...…………… …… ...…... 179 
 Chapter 14: Probability………………………………….……… 199
3 
  
Chapter 1: Thinking Cri tically about t he Logic of Arguments  
 
Logic and critical thinking together make up the systematic study of reasoning, and reasoning is 
what  we do when we draw a conclusion on the basis of other claims . In other words, reasoning is 
used when you infer one claim on the basis of another . For example, if you see a great deal of 
snow falling from the sky outside your bedroom window one morning, you can reasonably 
conclude that it’ s probably cold outside. Or, if you see a man smiling broadly, you can 
reasonably c onclude that he is at least somewhat happy.  In both cases, you are reasoning from 
evidence to a conclusion.  
 
We use reasoning all the time, but sometimes we make a mess out of it.  Whether a line of 
reasoning is good or not is  definitely more than “just a matter of opinion.”  Surely the reasoning 
in the following arguments is not compelling :  
 
* My four -year-old niece says that the planet Mars is smaller than Jupiter. It must thereby be the 
case that Mars is smaller than Jupiter.  
* Some women are baseball fa ns. And some mothers are baseball fans. Thus , all women are 
mothers.  
* An earthquake occurred in San Francisco five minutes after the senator’s speech there. Thus 
that senator’s voice causes natural disasters.  
 
But the reasoning in the next set of argument s is better, yes?  
 
* All bears are mammals. Grizzlies are bears. Thus grizzlies are mam mals. 
* If Jimmy Carter was the U.S. President, then he was a politician. Carter was indeed the U.S. 
President. Thus, Carter was a politician.  
* It has rained in Seattle , Washington every year for the past 100 years. Thus it will probably 
rain there next year.  
 
Some examples of reasoning are clearly better than others. The study of logic and critical 
thinking are designed to make us better at recognizing good from bad lin es of argumentation.  
 
An argument  consist s of one or more statements, called premises , offered as reason to believe 
that a  further statement, called the conclusion , is true. Technically speaking, premises and 
conclusions should be made up of statements . A statement is a sentence that declares something 
to be true or false. They are thus sometimes called declarative sentences . A sentence is a 
grammatically correct string of words, and there are many kinds of sentences other than 
statements. Questions (e.g., “What is your name?”), commands (e.g., “Turn to page three”), and 
exclamations (e.g., “Ouch!”) are all grammatically correct sentences that are not statements. 
They are not statements because it makes no sense to say they are true or false. (“What is your 
name?” “That’s true!” This would be a ridiculous mini -conversation.) Statements will always be 
true or false, never both, and never neither. We may disagree on whether a given statement is 
true (e.g., “God exists”), or we may not be able to determine wheth er a statement is true or false 
4 
 (e.g., “There is a mountain on Pluto exactly 1000 meters tall, plus or minus 2 centimeters”), yet 
the statement is objectively true or false (but not both) nonetheless.  
 
In this course, the words “statement” and “sentence” c an—in many contexts —be used 
interchangeably. This is so because all statements are sentences (although not all sentences are 
statements). So we can refer to “Bellevue is in Washington” as both a statement (because it 
declares something to be true) and a se ntence (because it is a grammatically correct sequence of 
words conveying a meaning).  
 
An argument can have any number of premises, but technically speaking there is one conclusion 
per argument. Thus, an argument splits  into two distinct parts:  
 
1. One or more premises  offer evidence for the truth of the conclusion.  
2. The conclusion  is supported by the premise or premises.  
 
Here is an argument:  
 
All dogs are mammals.  
No mammals are birds.  
Thus, no dogs are birds.  
 
The conclusion seems well supported by th e two premises. However, things are not so good in 
the following argument:  
 
Some cats are animals . 
Some animals are fish.  
Hence, some cats are not fish.  
 
In both examples above, the arguments contained two premises and one conclusion, but in the 
second arg ument  immediately above , the premises by themselves do not offer good reason to 
believe the conclusion —even if though the premises a re true!  
 
Sometimes the conclusion of an argument can be used as a premise of a following argument, 
making a chain of argume nts. Still, to be precise, each argument or specific line of inference 
contains one and only one conclusion, although each may contain varying number of premises. 
For instance:  
 
1. All dogs are mammals.  
2. All mammals are animals.  
3. Thus, all dogs are ani mals.  
4. Scooby -Doo is a dog.  
5. Thus, Scooby -Doo is an animal.  
6. No animals are plants.  
7. All trees are plants.  
8. Thus, Scooby -Doo is not a tree.  
5 
  
Whew! Here the first argument in the chain has lines 1 and 2 as premises, and has line 3 as its 
conclusio n. The second argument then uses line 3 as a premise and uses it with line 4 to conclude 
in line 5 that Scooby -Doo is a dog. The third argument then uses line 5 as a premise, hooks it up 
with lines 6 and 7, and uses the trio together to infer line 8 as the  final conclusion.  
 
**Practice Problems: Types of Sentences  
Are the following statements or not?  
 
1. George Carlin is presently president of the USA.  
2. Chocolate is a popular flavor of ice cream in the USA.  
3. Sally Brown, come on down!  
4. Washington Stat e is south of Oregon.  
5. Bob believes that Washington State is south of Oregon.  
6. College students are morally obliged to believe that Washington State is south of Oregon.  
7. Who in Oregon is rooting for the Huskies?  
8. It is prudent for Duck fans not to wear green when going to a Husky game in Seattle.  
9. Green is an Oregon Ducks color, while purple is a Washington Huskies color.  
10. The Huskies are my favorite college football team!  
11. Go Cougars!  
12. The Ducks will never win the Apple Cup.  
13. Huskies  
14. Ducks vs. Cougars  
15. The Ducks will play the Cougars tonight.  
16. Slap a ham on Omaha, pals!  
17. Dennis and Edna sinned.  
18. Rats live on no evil star.  
19. Tarzan raised Desi Arnaz’ rat.  
20. Go deliver a dare, vile dog.  
 
Answers:  
1. statement   6. statement   11. not a statement   16. not a statement  
2. statement   7. not a statement  12. statement    17. statement  
3. not a statement  8. statement   13. not a statement   18. statement  
4. statement   9. statement   14. not a statement   19. statement  
5. statement   10. statement   15. statement    20. not a statement  
 
Indicator Words  
 
Before determining whether an argument is good or bad, we need to recognize its structure. We 
need, that is, to know which claims are premises and which one is the conclusion. Indicator 
words or phrases can help us out here.  
 
A conclusion indicator is a word or phrase that, when used in the context of an argument, signals 
that a conclusion is about to be given or was just given. In the two examples above, “Thus” and 
6 
 “Hence” were used as in dicators to signal the presence of the conclusion. The following are 
some of the commonly used conclusion indicator words and phrases:  
 
Therefore   In conclusion   Hence     entails that  
Thus    Accordingly   Ergo     We may infer  
So   It follows that   We can co nclude that   implies that  
 
A premise indicator  is a word or phrase that, when used in the context of an argument, signals 
that a premise is about to  be given or was just given. Here are some examples:  
Because   Since     If   Provided that  
For the reason tha t for    Given that   Assuming that  
Due to the fact that  may be inferred from   Inasmuch as   is evidence for    
is reason to believe that     supports the claim that  
 
If you want to make your reasoning as clear as possible when you present arguments, use 
indic ator words to signal your premises and conclusions. Your audience (e.g., a teacher grading 
your essay) will appreciate it, and your reasoning will be easier to follow than it otherwise might 
be. 
 
Note, though, that some indicator words have multiple uses. The premise indicator “if,” for 
instance, is often used in other ways. For example, in the sentence, “If Yogi is a bear, then Yogi 
is an animal,” the word “if” is used as part of a single complex statement called a conditional 
(i.e., an “if…, then…” statem ent). Also, the conclusion indicator “so” can be used in many ways, 
such as, “I am so happy I’m studying logic!” Indicator words can be helpful, but we must still be 
careful in recognizing how they function in a sentence.  
 
**Practice Problems: Indicator Wo rds 
For each argument, (a) state any premise or conclusion indicators, and (b) state the conclusion.  
 
1. Since Tuan is a student, it follows that he studies regularly.  
2. Sarah is a mother, because she has given birth to a child.  
3. All dogs are mammals, a nd all mammals are animals; thus all dogs are animals.  
4. Given that Kim is the country’s president, that Kim is a politician may be inferred from the 
fact that all presidents of countries are politicians.  
5. The ground is wet during a heavy rain. Conseque ntly, due to the fact that it’s raining now, the 
ground now is wet.  
6. Provided that two is greater than one, and three is greater than two, it follows that three is 
greater than one.  
7. Tran is happy. Hence Tran is happy.  
8. Simón Bolívar was born in Vene zuela. Bolívar was a military hero in South America. This 
implies that a military hero was born in Venezuela.  
9. According to Socrates, people will do what they believe is in their best interests. Thus, since 
the good is in people’s best interest, it behoo ves philosophers to explain the good to people.  
10. Given that all dogs are mammals, and because no mammals are birds, it must be concluded 
that no dogs are fish.  
7 
 11. Assuming that Senator Sunny Shine likes to swim, and inasmuch as today is warm and the 
sun is out, it follows that Sunny Shine is swimming in her backyard pool.  
12. Shine and her husband don’t want to unduly offend their neighbors, and their neighbors are 
not fans of skinny -dipping. We may infer that Shine and her husband don’t skinny -dip when  
their neighbors are watching.  
13. Pastor Bustle is opposed to all skinny -dipping. Bustle is opposed to some of the Shines’ 
activities, due to the fact that Bustle knows that the Shines like to skinny -dip. 
14. If Bustle climbs a ladder to look over the fen ce at the Shines, then Bustle will probably fall 
and twist his ankle. Bustle does indeed climb a ladder to look over the fence at the Shines. This 
entails that Bustle will probably fall and twist his ankle.  
15. Either Bustle get s away with voyeurism or the  police fail to charge him with a misdemeanor. 
Since the police do fail to charge Bustle with a misdemeanor, Bustle accordingly gets away with 
voyeurism.  
 
Answers:  
1. (a) Since; it follows that; (b) he studies regularly  
2. (a) because; (b) Sarah is a mothe r 
3. (a) thus; (b) all dogs are animals  
4. (a) Given that; may be inferred from; (b) Kim is a politician  
5. (a) Consequently; due to the fact that; (b) the ground is now wet  
6. (a) Provided that; it follows that; (b) three is greater than one.  
7. (a) Henc e; (b) Tran is happy (the second instance of the claim)  
8. (a) This implies that; (b) a military hero was born in Venezuela  
9. (a) Thus; since; (b) it behooves philosophers to explain the good to people  
10. (a) Given that; because; it must be concluded tha t; (b) no dogs are fish  
11. (a) Assuming that; inasmuch as; it follows that; (b) Sunny Shine is swimming in her 
backyard pool.  
12. (a) We may infer that; (b) Shine and her husband don’t skinny -dip when their neighbors are 
watching  
13. (a) due to the fact t hat; (b) Bustle is opposed to some of the Shines’ activities  
14. (a) This entails that; (b) Bustle will probably fall and twist his ankle  
15. (a) Since; accordingly; (b) Bustle accordingly gets away with voyeurism  
 
Distinguishing Arguments from N on-argumen ts 
 
We probably will not understand what an argument is unless we can tell the difference between 
an argument and a non -argument. This is why the ability to distinguish arguments from things 
that are not arguments is an important skill in logic . 
 
 An argum ent is someone’s reasoning expressed in the format of a language. When an argument 
is given, one or more reasons are being offered for a conclusion. However, there are many things 
we do with language besides reason. We use language to describe things, to e xplain things, to 
express our feelings, to give orders, to ask questions, to tell stories, to give advice, to offer 
reports, to babble incoherently, and on and on. None of these activities involves logical 
argumentation; none constitutes giving an argument . Essentially, in the case of a non-argument , 
8 
 someone is not trying to prove a point —someone is not offering a reason to believe a claim that 
is being advanced, someone is not offering evidence for a conclusion, while in the case of an 
argument, someone is  offering reasons in support of a conclusion, reasons to believe that a claim 
is true.  
 
**Practice Problems: Arguments and Non -arguments  
In each case, does the passage present an argument or a non -argument?  
 
1. Elizabeth and Marty went together to school on Tuesday, got in a minor automobile accident, 
and were late for their biology class. Their teacher was giving a test that day, and the two 
students were not there to take it.  
2. Elizabeth and Marty left their house to go to school on Tuesday, but on the way decided to 
spend the day at the movie theater instead. Their biology teacher was giving a test that day, and 
the two students were not there to take it. That is why they received a poor grade for their 
coursework that week.  
3. Elizabeth and Marty, you two are crazy! You should not have gone to the movies Tuesday, 
especially when you had a test in your biology class. You should go to school each day classes 
are in session.  
4. Elizabeth and Marty went together to school every day this week and studied th e material 
covered in class. Students who attend class regularly and study regularly usually do well in class. 
Thus Elizabeth and Marty probably did well in class this week.  
5. Some students do not attend class regularly. For instance, Elizabeth and Marty went together 
to school on Tuesday, but decided to return home to play Grand Theft Auto all day. Such 
behavior is indicative of poor study habits.  
6. Maria studies every night for her chemistry class, and works very precisely in her chemistry 
lab work. She  also attends class each day and takes complete notes. We can conclude that Maria 
will likely do well in her chemistry class.  
7. Both Mahatma Gandhi and Sri Aurobindo were philosophically minded, both were male, both 
were from India, and both wrote comment aries on the Bhagavad Gita . Gandhi fought against 
British occupation of India. Thus probably Aurobindo did, too.  
8. Rene Descartes had trouble  seeing the relations between things  in Nature , focused on breaking 
“problems” into smaller parts, and missed view ing systems holistically. Thus he has been 
deemed a “mechanistic” philosopher.  
9. Fatima likes pizza. Julio likes football. Takashi likes reading The Tale of Genji . 
10. Sunzi wrote The Art of War , and The Art of War  was written by a Chinese philosopher. Su nzi 
must therefore be a Chinese philosopher.  
 
Answers:  
1. Non -argument. It’s merely a report of the day’s events with no inference.  
2. Non -argument. It’s a causal explanation of the students’ poor grades with no inference.  
3. Non -argument. It’s a combinati on of opinion and advice, but with no inference.  
4. Argument. There are a series of claims serving as premises leading to a conclusion (note the 
indicator word “thus”).  
5. Non -argument. It’s merely an illustration of the opening claim with no inference.  
6. Argument. Note the use of the conclusion indicator, “We can conclude that.”  
9 
 7. Argument. This is an argument from analogy.  
8. Non -argument. We find the word “thus” (which is often a conclusion indicator), but here it is 
pointing to the effect of a causal relation. That is, the final statement is explained by the previous 
ones, but there is no inference intended here.  
9. Non -argument. It’s just an unconnected string of claims.   
10. Argument. The two claims in the first sentence offer reason to believe the c laim in the final 
sentence.  Also, “therefore” is functioning as a conclusion indicator.  
10 
 Chapter 2: Deduction and Induction  
 
Logicians divide all argu ments into two broad categories:  deductive arguments and inductive 
arguments. Every argu ment falls into on e of these two  categories.  Of course people offering 
arguments often do not fully understand what they are doing. That is, they may be unclear how 
powerful their arguments could be, assuming they are arguing well. Still, once we understand 
what their argum ents are, it’s usually not difficult to determine if each is best understood as 
deductive or inductive.  
 
Deductive Arguments  
 
A deductive  argument claims  (explicitly or implicitly) that if the premises all are true, then the 
conclusion  must  be true. Deduc tive arguments thus aim to establish their conclusions with 
complete certainty in such a way that the conclusion is guaranteed to be true if the premises all 
are true. Note that the argument may fail in its aim; what makes the argument deductive is that it 
is the kind of argument that —if it were successful —would have the  premises absolutely 
guarantee the conclusion to be true.  
 
The following  four arguments are all deductive:  
 
* All bats are cute  animals . No cute animals are mean. So, certainly, no bats are mean.  
* Joan is Lauren’s mother. Therefore, Joan must be older than Lauren.  
* Nobody knows Ned. Therefore, it must be that Ned does not know himself.  
* Some cats are pets. Thus, some pets must be cats.  
 
Inductive Arguments  
 
An inductive  argument claims  (explicitly or implicitly) that if the premises all ar e true, the 
conclusion  is thereby probably,  or likely,  true, although not absolutely guaranteed . Inductive 
arguments thus aim to establish their conclusions with probability, or likelihood, but not with 
complete certainty. An inductive argument does not attempt to guarantee that its conclusion  is 
true; however, it aims to show that we have good reasons to accept the conclusion as true 
nevertheless. “Probably,” in this context, means greater than 50 percent  chance. Admittedly, 
quantifying the likelihood of a conclusion being true is not always easy, but “ better  than a 50 
percent chance” gets the idea across. Note that the inductive argument may fail in its aim; what 
makes the argument inductive is that it is the kind of argument that —done well —can give good  
but less than 100 percent conclusive reason to believe the conclusion.  
 
Examples of induction are found in everyday life, where people use less than guaranteed 
reasoning to go about their daily business. Y ou’ve never (or rarely) been poisoned at the school 
cafeteria, so you feel safe eating there later today.  Your past experiences do not absolutely 
guarantee that you won’t get sick eating there today, but you will eat there nonetheless…and be 
perfectly rat ional in doing so. You’ll be using a strong form of inductive reasoning. The 
following four arguments are also inductive:  
11 
  
* Pat and Jan are lifelong best friends. So Jan probably knows Pat’s parents.  
* It has been sunny for ten days in a row, and there a re no clouds in the sky. So probably it will 
be sunny tomorrow.  
* Joe hasn’t had a drink in ten years. So it is likely he won’t drink at the party tonight.  
* Most dogs are loving animals. Fido  is a dog. Therefor e Fido  is probably a loving animal.  
 
Deduct ive or Inductive?  
 
Sometimes it is difficult to tell whether a person’s argument is deductive or inductive because 
the reasoning is not clearly stated. When trying to decide whether an argument is deductive or 
inductive, a good rule of thumb is to ask your self: Is the arguer aiming to show that the 
conclusion is guaranteed  to be true, or is he or she aiming only to show that the conclusion is 
likely  to be true, i.e., is probably true but less than certain? If the arguer’s reasoning is expressed 
clearly, the n there will often be words or other clues indicating which type of argument 
(deductive or inductive) is intended. If a deductive argument is intended, then the conclusion 
may be introduced with words or phrases indicating necessity or certainty, such as:  
 
It is certain that  
Absolutely  
Undeniably, it must be that  
For sure  
It is necessarily true that  
 
However, if an inductive argument is intended, then the conclusion may be introduced with 
words or phrases indicating probability, such as:  
 
The most reasonab le conclusion is  
Probably  
It is likely that  
It is reasonable to suppose that  
I’ll bet that  
 
Some common phrases are found in both deductive and inductive arguments, and thus do not 
help much in determining which kind of argument you are dealing with. “It must be the case 
that” is an example of a phrase you often find attached to both  premises and the conclusion, of  
both deductive and inductive arguments.  
 
Notice, though, that whereas deductive arguments have an air of certainty, confidence, and 
conclusiven ess, inductive arguments have an air of uncertainty and incompleteness. While a 
deductive argument claims its conclusion must  be true, and with certainty, an inductive argument 
claims only that if its premises all are true then its conclusion is probable a lthough not 
completely certain.  
 
12 
 If everyone were honest or understood inductive and deductive indicator words, and if everyone 
offering an argument used such vocabulary accurately, we’d have a fairly easy time determining 
if arguments are intended as indu ctive or deductive. But none of this is the case, unfortunately. 
Too many people don’t understand or care about the difference between induction and deduction, 
or try to overstate the strength of their inductive position by couching their arguments in 
dedu ctive indicator words. We need additional hints to be confident that we are dealing with a 
deductive (or inductive) argument.  
 
Argument Patterns  
 
Since so few people use indicator words at all or correctly, it’s of great use to become familiar 
with pattern s of argument that usually are associated with deduction or ind uction. These tips are 
not fail -safe, as occasionally odd counterexamples can be imagined. Still, the patterns provide 
good reason for saying that a given argument is deductive, or inductive. E xamples of such 
patterns include the following.  
 
Deductive patterns:  
 
* Arguments based on math  
Since we know basic math truths (e.g., 2+2=4) with our highest degree of certitude, any 
argument based  (not merely about ) math will have a similar degree of cer titude.  
E.g., Joe passed two touchdowns in the first half of the football game, and he passed one 
touchdown in the second half of the game. Thus Joe passed three touchdowns in that game.  
E.g., This Euclidian triangle has one right interior angle and one 10  degree interior angle. Thus 
the third interior angle must be 80 degrees.  
Note: The following argument is not based  on math, it is about math; it is not deductive: “All my 
math teachers say that two plus two equals four. Thus two plus two equals four.”  
 
* Arguments based on definitions  
If an inference is based on the definition of a word, then (even if the definition is mistaken) the 
argument is best understood as deductive.  
E.g., Sara is a physician. Thus Sara is [by definition] a doctor.  
E.g., This shirt is damp. Thus this shirt is moist.  
E.g., Bob has no hair on his head. Therefore Bob is bald.  
 
* Categorical syllogisms  
A syllogism has two premises, and a categorical syllogism is a two -premise argument in which 
each premise and the conclusion begin with t he words “All,” “No,” or “Some,” in any 
combination.  
E.g., All dogs are hairy things, and all hairy things are mammals. Thus all dogs are mammals.  
E.g., No dogs are cats. Some cats are white animals. Thus some dogs are not white animals.  
 
* Conditional syl logisms  
A “conditional syllogism” is a two -premise argument in which at least one premise is an “if…, 
then…” statement, known as a conditional, or implication.  
13 
 E.g., If Yogi is a bear, then Yogi is an animal. Yogi is a bear. Thus Yogi is an animal.  
E.g., I f it rains today, then the picnic is canceled. If the picnic is canceled, then I’ll be sad. 
Hence, if it rains today, then I’ll be sad.  
 
* Disjunctive syllogisms  
A disjunction is an “…or…” statement, so a disjunctive syllogism is a two -premise argument in 
which one of the premises is an “…or…” statement (with or without an “either”).  
E.g., Either Bob is logical or Sue is happy. But Bob is not logical. Therefore Sue is happy.  
 
Inductive patterns:  
 
* Predictions  
If the conclusion is a prediction (about the fu ture), then it is likely an inductive argument, since 
we cannot know the future with total certainty.  
E.g., It has rained every day for the past five weeks. Thus it will probably rain tomorrow, too.  
 
* Arguments from analogy  
An argument from analogy compar es two things or two groups of things, notes many relevant 
similarities between the two, and concludes that probably what is known to be true of one will be 
true of the other.  
E.g., I’ve eaten at Dick’s Drive -In 20 times this past month and enjoyed my dini ng experience 
each time. Dick’s has not changed recently in any relevant way, so I will likely enjoy my dining 
experience at Dick’s when I go there later today.  
E.g., After studying only one night beforehand, I’ve aced the last three logic quizzes in this class. 
So even though I’ve studied only one night for this class’s upcoming logic quiz, I’ll probably ace 
it, too.  
 
* Appeal to authority  
An appeal to authority argues that because an expert says such -and-such, then such -and-such is 
likely to be true. As l ong as the expert is truly expert (i.e., authoritative) in his, her, their, or its 
field, then the argument can be quite strong.  
E.g., Every biology instructor will say that mice are mammals. Thus we have good reason to 
believe that mice are mammals. (A st rong argument, because biology instructors are very 
knowledgeable on such matters.)  
E.g., My chemistry teacher says that God does not exist. We can conclude that God does not 
exist. (A weak argument, because (a) chemistry teachers qua chemistry teachers ar e not experts 
on God’s existence, and (b) it makes little sense to consider anyone an expert on God’s 
existence. The same would be the case if the teacher had said that God does exist. If the 
chemistry teacher came up with a good argument  against (or for) God’s existence, then perhaps 
that argument might give us good reason to disbelieve (or believe) in God.  
E.g., The Washington State highway sign we just passed said that we’re entering the city of 
Seattle. Thus we are probably entering the city of Seattle.  (A strong argument, as state highway 
signs are usually reliable regarding city names.)  
 
* Generalizations  
14 
 Think of polls as common examples of generalizations. You determine that something is true of 
a portion of a group, and conclude that the same thing must be true of the group as a whole.  
E.g., Twenty percent of my Bellevue College logic students are fans of Miles Davis. Thus twenty 
percent of Bellevue College’s students are fans of Miles Davis.  
E.g., Most Roman Catholics living in North Bend , Washingto n believe in a Christian concept of 
God. Thus most people in the world believe in a Christian concept of God.  
 
* Causal arguments  
A causal argument appeals to well -known causal relations to argue from cause to effect or from 
effect to cause. Police detecti ves do this when they see a crime scene with effects (e.g., a dead 
body with a knife in its back) and try to argue towards the cause (e.g., who did it, why, when, 
how, etc.). Doctors and auto mechanics trying to figure out the cause of a medical or mechani cal 
problem argue the same way.  
E.g., I placed a jug of water in my freezer last night. Thus that jug of water is now likely frozen. 
(The argument here is from cause to effect.)  
E.g., The instructor just passed back our logic tests, and Maria is holding he rs and smiling. I 
conclude that she must have received a high score on that test. (The argument here is from effect 
to cause.)  
 
An argument can fit more than one pattern, and that’s not a problem. For instance  
 
My trustworthy wife said that she will buy so me bread this evening. Thus she will likely buy 
some bread this evening.  
 
This argument is an appeal to authority and its conclusion is a prediction. It’s quite clear that it’s 
best understood as inductive. The indicator word “likely” makes its inductive n ature all the more 
clear.  
 
If an argument clearly fits both an inductive and a deductive pattern, then it’s generally safe to 
figure the argument is deductive. This is because if an argument is constructed so that if the 
premises are true the conclusion ca n be guaranteed to be true, it will also be the case that the 
conclusion is likely  true. If a conclusion is sure to be true, then it’s obviously going to be 
probably true. But only deductive arguments have premises that absolutely guarantee the 
conclusion;  so if an argument can do that, it’s deductive. For example:  
 
If a blizzard dropped four feet of snow on the city park last night, then today’s picnic will be 
canceled. A blizzard did indeed drop four feet of snow on the city park last night. Thus, today’s  
picnic will be canceled.  
 
The argument fits both the conditional syllogism pattern for deduction and the prediction pattern 
of induction. But if the premises are true, they guarantee that the conclusion will be true; and 
only a deductive argument can do t hat. So we’re justified in interpreting this as a deductive 
argument.  
 
**Practice Problems: Deduction and Induction  
15 
 For each argument, state whether it is deductive or inductive. Some contain deduction or 
induction indicator words; others do not.  
 
1. Some dogs are mammals. Some mammals are animals. Thus some dogs are animals.  
2. Either Thomas Aquinas was a writer or he was an astronaut. But he was not a writer. Thus he 
definitely was an astronaut.  
3. Nearly all geometry teachers are serious when they say th at triangles have three sides. Thus, 
on that basis, we can say that triangles have three sides.  
4. Some diseases can spread easily from one person to another by skin contact. Thus it is 
guaranteed that some diseases are contagious.  
5. No human has ever liv ed for 2000 years. Thus the current prime minister of England will not 
live for 2000 years.  
6. The official sign posted at the edge of our campus says that this is Catatonic State University. 
Therefore, this must be Bellevue College.  
7. If Michael Jackson was president of the United States, then he was a politician. Michael 
Jackson was a politician. Thus Michael Jackson was president of the United States.  
8. The U.S. military dropped many bombs on Iraq while fighting there. Bombs almost always 
explode, dest roying things near them. Thus the U.S. military probably destroyed things in Iraq.  
9. If Lady Gaga [the female singer] is an adult man, then Lady Gaga is a male. But Lady Gaga is 
not an adult man. Thus Lady Gaga is not a male.  
10. German philosopher Georg Hegel was a space alien. Thus Georg Hegel was a space alien.  
11. No dogs are cats. No cats are mice. Thus it is guaranteed that some cats are not mice.  
12. Large, naturally occurring icebergs have yet to be found in the middle of the Sahara Desert. 
Thus it  is likely that no such ice berg will be found there next year.  
13. The Atlantic Ocean lies between Africa and South America. Africa is immediately east of the 
Atlantic Ocean. Thus South America is certainly west of the Atlantic Ocean.  
14. The sign placed by officials on the Statue of Liberty in New York City says that it was made 
by Peruvian artists. Thus the Statue of Liberty was likely made by Peruvian artists.  
15. Every rock -n-roll musician says that we should all eat corn for dinner every night. Thus w e 
should eat corn for dinner every night.  
16. The label on this bottle says, “Poison.” Therefore the bottle must contain poison.  
17. Three is larger than two, and two is larger than one. Thus one is less than three.  
18. Most people in our society are oppos ed to murder. Thus murder is probably wrong.  
19. God has all perfections. Existence is a perfection. Thus it is necessary that God has the 
perfection of existence. Thus it is necessary that God exists.  
20. There is much evil in the world. And since God is supposed to be all -good and all -powerful, 
God would not want or need to allow evil. Thus God likely does not exist.  
 
Answers:  
1. Deductive   6. Inductive   11. Deductive   16. Inductive  
2. Deductive   7. Deductive   12. Inductive   17. Deductive  
3. Inductive   8. Inductive   13. Deductive   18. Inductive  
4. Deductive   9. Deductive   14. Inductive   19. Deductive  
5. Inductive   10. Deductive   15. Inductive   20. Inductive  
16 
 Chapter 3: Evaluating Deductive Arguments  
 
Valid vs. Invalid  
  
Every argument in the universe needs  to “pass” two tests; the arguments must be logically  good 
and factually  good. We are speaking loosely at this point, but all deductive and inductive 
arguments must meet the same basic pair of demands : it must be the case that (a) it s premises 
give good re ason to believe the conclusion, and (b) the premises are actually true. The first 
concern pertains to the relation the premises have to the conclusion, and the actual truth or 
falsity of the premises is  often irrelevant. The second concern pertains to the facts of the matter 
and to whether the claims of the premises correspond  accurately to the world. Figuring out if an 
argument is logically  good or not often involves a hypothetical thought experiment in which you 
don’t really care if the premises are actua lly true or not. Figuring out if the argument is factually  
good forces you to step out of the hypoth etical thought experiment and  rely on your knowledge 
of the real world. We’ll begin by focusing our attention on the first concern.  
 
As we have seen, a dedu ctive argument is any argument claiming either explicitly or implicitly 
that if the premises all are true, then the conclusion must be true. Deductive arguments are 
evaluated as either “valid” or “invalid.” A deductive argument is valid when it is indeed t he case 
that if the premises are true then the conclusion must be true, and a deductive argument is invalid 
when it is not the  case that if the premises are true then the conclusion must be true.  
 
To determine if a deductive argument is valid or invalid, a sk yourself a question:  Is it logically 
impossible for the premises to be true and at the same time and from the same perspective for the 
conclusion to be false? I f “Yes,” then the argument is valid. If “No,” then the argument is 
invalid.  
 
The distinction  between valid and invalid arguments will become clearer after you ’ve examined 
some examples. The following deductive arguments are all valid.  Notice that it is impossible  for 
the premises to be true and the conclusion  false.  
 
* Every square has four sides . This figure is a square. Therefore this figure must have four sides.  
* Tom is older than Bob and Bob is older than Ed. So Tom must be older than Ed.  
* Some cats are pets. Thus, it must be that some pets are cats.  
* Alfredo is Sue’s (biological) father. Therefore, Alfredo must be older than Sue, because fathers 
are always older than their biological children.   
 
The following deductive arguments are invalid.  Notice that it is possible for the premises to be 
true and the conclusion false.  
 
* Javon is older  than Betty. Therefore, Javon must be taller than Betty.  
* All members of the XYZ club are senior citizens. Thus it must be that all senior citizens are 
members of the XYZ club.  
* All members of the Hells Angels live in California. Joe lives in California.  Therefore, it is 
certain that Joe is a member of the Hells Angels.  
17 
 * If the sun i s out, then Vu is swimming. Vu is swimming. So it must be that the sun is out.  
 
Each argument above is deductive because the claim in each case is that the conclusion must be 
true if the premises are true. However, some are valid deductive arguments and some are invalid, 
because some succeed in showing that their conclusions must  be true if their premises are true, 
and some do not. That is, for the invalid arguments, it is l ogically possible for the premises to be 
true and the conclusion to be false. The premises are thus not guaranteeing the conclusion.  
 
We have been speaking of “logical possibilities.” The word “possibility” can mean different 
things in different contexts. In the context of logic, a nything counts as logically possible  as long 
as it doe s not imply a contradiction. A contradiction is a claim that says a statement is both true 
and false at the same time and from the same perspective. For instance, “Bob is six f eet tall, and 
it is false that Bob is six feet tall.” Both statements can’t be true; they contradict each other. As 
long as a statement does not contradict itself or imply a contradiction, it is logically possible to 
be true, or more loosely, logically pos sible . 
 
Sometimes in ordinary conversation we speak of possibility in a different sense. For instance, 
“It’s impossible for a person to swim across the Atlantic Ocean in under two minutes.” It’s 
logically possible  for such a feat to take place, as it impli es no contradiction, but it’s physically 
impossible certainly, given the world’s laws of physics and the nature of our bodies. The friction 
of such movement through so much water would rip the flesh off anyone’s body. Logicians 
speak of logical impossibili ty, though, and are less concerned usually with what we can loosely 
call physical impossibility . 
 
The following statements  are logically possible because although they are ex tremely unlikely 
they do not contradict  themselves or imply a contradiction .  
 
* Bob was over 60 years old when he entered the Olympic track and field event for the USA, yet 
he won the gold medal in the 50 -meter sprint.  
* A living Tyrannosaurus Rex will destroy Bellevue College’s cafeteria in 2015.  
 
In logic, any statement of the form “ P and it is not the case that P” (where P is a statement ) 
counts as a logical contradiction. Here are three examples of logical contradictions:  
 
* Ahmad is a sibling of Jules;  however Jules is not a sibling of Ahmad.  
* Sara now has exactly two coins in her  right hand, and she now has precisely an even number of 
coins in her right hand.  
* Mexico is north of the USA and it is not the case Mexico is north of the USA.  
  
In each case above, the statement begins saying one thing, and then ends up saying that what  it 
said at the beginning is false. Yet no statement can be true and false at the same time from the 
same perspective.  Contradiction s thereby are always false.  
 
18 
 The notion of logical possibility is important in critical thinking, as it’s a key  concept in 
assessing the logical success of many arguments. Specifically, i t’s crucial  in considering an 
argument’s validity . 
     
Valid  vs. Invalid  
 
Suppose you are looking at a deductive argument trying to decide whether it is valid or invalid. 
How do you decide? Ag ain, ask yourself a hypothetical question: Is it logically impossible for 
the premises to be true and at the same time the conclusion be false?  
 
If you answer “Yes ”—in other words —if the conclusion must  be true if the premises are true, 
then the argument is valid . However, if your answer is “No” because the conclusion might be 
false even if the premises are true, then the argument is invalid . For example, suppose the Smiths 
are a big family living in Lynnwood, Washington:  
  
All the Smiths are Catholics.  
All Catholics live in Italy.  
So, all the Smiths must  live in Italy.  
  
Is it impossible  the premises could be true and the conclusion false? Yes ! If the premises were 
true, the conclusion would certainly  be true. This argument is therefore valid . It is logica lly 
good. The structure of the argument is such that if the premises were true (and they are not , but 
for now that’s irrelevant ) the conclusion would be guaranteed to be true. We see this once we 
agree to do the thought experiment of asking about the possi bility of the premises being true 
while the conclusion is false. Of course, given what we know about the Smiths (i.e., that they 
live in Lynnwood, Washington) the second premise is clearly false (and maybe the first premise, 
too), so the argument is factua lly bad, but we’ll get to that concern momentarily. For right now 
we are concerned only with the logical structure —or “bones” —of the argument. We’ll look at 
issues pertaining to the facts, or “truth value ,” of the premises in a bit.  
  
More Examples…  
 
The following are additional examples of  valid  arguments:  
  
This apple is red.  
Thus, this apple is colored.  
 
I have exactly two coins in my right hand.  
Hence, I have an even number of coins in my right hand  
 
If it snow s, then the roof will be white.  
If it rai ns, then the roof will be wet.  
It will either snow or rain.  
So, definitely , either the roof will be white or it will be wet.  
 
19 
 If we go to Texas, then we will go to Dallas.  
If we go to Dallas, then we will visit the JFK museum.  
Therefore, surely if we go t o Texas, then we will  visit the JFK museum.  
 
If the air  freezes, then the pond will freeze.  
The air  will freeze.  
Then the pond will certainly  freeze.  
 
Either the box is in Portland or the box is in Seattle.  
The box is not in Seattle.  
Consequently, it must  be in Portland.  
   
These are examples of invalid  arguments:  
  
This apple is colored.  
Thus, this apple is red.  
 
I have an even number of coins in my right hand.  
Hence, I have exactly two coins in my right hand.  
 
Isaac is Susan’s cousin.  
Rita is Susan’s cou sin. 
Therefore, Rita and Isaac are necessarily  cousins , too.  
 
Ever y time it rains my car gets wet.  
My car is wet.  
So, it certainly must  be raining.  
 
All cats are mammals.  
Dogs are mammals.  
So, dogs are guaranteed to  be cats . 
 
We need to note that things can get a little weird sometimes. Again, a valid argument is one for 
which it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. In evaluating the 
validity of an argument we’d normally just ask if the premises provide enough information to  
absolutely guarantee the conclusion. And this approach works for nearly every normal deductive 
argument. But what about the following arguments?  
 
#1 Frank Sinatra was a singer.  
 Thus, Frank Sinatra was a singer.  
 
#2 Two plus two equals five.  
 Thus, Bo Did dley is currently the U.S. president.  
 
#3 Two plus two equals five.  
20 
  Thus, Frank Sinatra was a singer.  
 
#4 The Beatles were from England.  
 Thus, one plus one equals two.  
 
#5 The Beatles were from Peru.  
 Thus, one plus one equals two.  
 
Weird arguments, yes?  The first seems nearly useless (and it is), but it’s both valid and sound. 
It’s valid because it’s impossible for the premise to be true (and it is) and at the same time from 
the same perspective the conclusion be false. But what about the other four argu ments? The 
premises don’t seem to have anything to do with the conclusions. Still, they are all valid because 
in each case it’s impossible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false. In #2 and 3, the 
premise of each is mathematically certain; the claim is necessarily true…it’s impossible to be 
false. And with #4 and 5, each conclusion is necessarily true. So, for #2 -5, each argument either 
has a premise that can’t possibly be  true or a conclusion that can’t possibly be false, so none of 
them are su ch that it is possible for the premises t o be true and the conclusion false.  
 
This may seem counter -intuitive until the definition of validity sinks in, but keep in mind that we 
are only talking about the logical structure of arguments right now. Argument #1 may be trivial, 
since the premise more or less just proves itself. Arguments #2, 3, and 5 have false premises, so 
those arguments will be rejected d ue to their factual problems. Argument #4 is actually okay, 
although seemingly strange. It’s just that th e conclusion is necessarily true, so we can appeal to 
anything —or nothing —to see that it’s true. We ’ll look at necessary truths (e.g., tautologies) in 
more detail later in the course.  
  
Valid ≠ True  
Invalid ≠ False  
  
It is time to fine -tune our use of Engl ish. When we call an argument valid we are not saying that 
the argument is “true.” First of all, as our terms have been defined, there is no such thing as a 
“true argument.” There are true premises, true conclusions (as well as false ones , of course), but 
there is no such thing as a “true argument.” Only statements can be true or false. To talk about a 
“true argument” would be like referring to a “red idea.” You can have an idea of redness, but 
ideas themselves are not colored. It’s what philosophers call a  “category mistake.” Secondly, in 
logic, the word “valid” does not mean true. More specifically, to call an argument valid is not to 
say that the premises are true, and it is also not to say that the conclusion is true. An argument 
may have false premises and still be valid. It is not required that an argument have true premises 
in order to be valid. For instance, here is a valid argument with false premises and a false 
conclusion:  
 
All dogs are birds.  
All birds are fish.  
Hence, all dogs are fish.  
 
21 
 Furtherm ore, an argument may have true premises and even a true conclusion and yet be invalid ! 
It is not required that an argument have false premises in order to be invalid. For instance:  
 
All poodles are dogs.  
All poodles are mammals.  
It follows that all dogs ar e mammals.   
 
This argument is invalid because if the premises were true then the conclusion would still not be 
guaranteed to be true. The premises do not supply enough information for us to be sure of the 
conclusion, even though we happen to know that the conclusion is actually true. For all the 
premises tell us, there might be some dogs that are not mammals.  
 
So keep the following points in mind:  
  
* In some cases an argument is valid yet it has false premises and a false conclusion.  
* In some cases an a rgument is invalid even though it has true premises and a true conclusion.  
  
In a valid argument, the premises are related to the conclusion in such a way that if the premises 
were true, then the conclusion would have to be true as well. Validity is thus a hypothetical 
relationship between two things. Even if the premises and conclusion are all false, they can still 
be related hypothetically  in such a way that if the premises were to be true,  the conclusion would 
have to be  true.  
 
Let’s apply this to one more example . Consider the following deductive argument:  
  
All cats are fish.  
All fish are purple.  
Therefore, it must be that all cats are purple.  
  
Notice that each premise is clearly  false; and the conclusion is false as well. But: If the premises 
were t o be true (hypothetically), then the conclusion would have to be true. The conclusion 
would be guaranteed. If the premises were to be true (hypothetically), then the conclusion would 
have to be true. The conclusion would be certain. Therefore, the argument  is valid, even though 
it has false premises and a false conclusion.  
  
**Practice Problems: Valid and Invalid Arguments  
For each of the following deductive arguments, determine whether it is valid or invalid.  
 
1. Some dogs are mammals. Some dogs are poodl es. Thus , some mammals are poodles.  
2. Either the former U.S. president George W. Bush was not a professional baseball player or he 
was not a famous rock singer. But he was a famous rock singer. Thus , George W. Bush was not a 
professional baseball player.  
3. The word ‘wet’ has three letters in it. Thus , the word ‘wet’ has an odd number of letters in it.  
4. If Mahatma Gandhi was a woman, then Mahatma Gandhi was a female. But Mahatma Gandhi 
was not a woman. Therefore , Mahatma Gandhi was not a female.  
22 
 5. Nine  is greater than four, and four is greater than six. Thus , nine is greater than four.  
6. René Descartes is now the U.S. President. Thus , René Descartes is now the U.S. President.  
7. All cats are tigers. No tigers are fish. Thus , no cats are fish.  
8. Snow -covered landscapes are chilly. Hence, snow -covered landscapes are cold.  
9. This geometric figure is a square. Therefore, this geometric figure has three sides.  
10. If Bertrand Russell wrote a book on advanced logic, then he was a logician. Bertrand Russell 
did indeed write a book on advanced logic. And either he was not a logician or he was a ballet 
star. Thus , Bertrand Russell was a ballet star.  
11. Five is greater than two. Two is greater than ten. Thus , five is greater than ten.  
12. Elephants fly. Elephan ts are animals. Thus , some animals fly.  
13. Elias is a gzworg. Thus, Elias is a gzworg.  
14. If Malcolm X was a National Hockey League star, then Malcolm X was a professional 
athlete. Malcolm X was not a professional athlete. Thus , Malcolm X was not a Natio nal Hockey 
League star.  
15. Some dogs are German shepherds. Thus , some dogs are not German shepherds.  
16. June is a tyyrewkj. Thus , it is false that June is a tyyrewkj.  
17. Senator Garcia is a bachelor. Thus , Senator Garcia is an unmarried adult male.  
18. No dogs are cats. No  cats are elephants. Thus, no dogs are elephants.  
19. Most people in our country believe that murder is morally wrong. Thus, it is certain that 
murder in our country is morally wrong.  
20. If we were meant to be nude, we’d all be born th at way. We were  indeed all born nude. Thus , 
we were meant to be nude.  
21. Squares have three sides. Thus, apples are fruit.  
22. Squares have four sides. It follows that apples are not fruit.  
23. Squares have three sides. Hence, two plus two equals four.  
24. Squares have four sides. Therefore, two plus two equals six.  
25. Some apples are red. We can conclude that two plus two equals four.  
26. Squares have ten sides. Thus, squares have ten sides.  
27. The majority of the people in our culture believe that whit e people should get preferential 
treatment. Thus white people in our culture should get preferential treatment.  
28. Our moral beliefs are largely produced by the upbringing we had in our culture. Thus there is 
nothing objectively true or false about our mo ral beliefs.  
29. People disagree about what’s morally or right and wrong. Thus there is no objective basis 
from which to determine whether and action is morally right or wrong.  
30. No one has yet proved that there is an objective basis for determining whet her an action is 
morally right or wrong. Thus, there is no objective basis for determining whether an action is 
morally right or wrong.  
31. All the arguments for the moral theory known as Cultural Relativism are logically bad. Thus, 
we can be certain that the moral theory known as Cultural Relativism is false.  
32. The morality of a culture is determined solely by its social norms. The norms of the USA are 
at present at least partially racist. Thus it is mora lly obligatory for the people o f the USA to be at 
least partially racist.  
33. The moral obligation of a culture is determined solely by its social norms. Anyone who fights 
against social norms is going against what’s morally obligatory. Martin Luther King, Jr. fought 
against social norms in Birmingham, Al abama in the early 1960s. Thus we sho uld say today that 
23 
 Martin Luther King, Jr. was morally wrong then to do so.  
34. If social norms determine what is morally obligatory for a culture (and all cultures obviously 
follow their norms), then what is morally ob ligatory for a culture can be discovered merely by 
determining its norms. The norms of our culture at present are anti -gay. Thus we should be anti -
gay. 
35. Our cultural norms determine what is morally obligatory for us. But every culture at any time 
is (ob viously) acting according to its norms. Thus at any given time, a culture is morally perfect 
in every respect and cannot improve morally. Thus the USA is at present morally perfect 
regarding race relations, and cannot improve morally  in that matter . 
 
Answe rs: 
1. Invalid   14. Valid   27. Invalid  
2. Valid   15. Invalid   28. Invalid  
3. Valid   16. Invalid   29. Invalid  
4. Invalid   17. Valid   30. Invalid  
5. Valid   18. Invalid   31. Invalid  
6. Valid   19. Invalid   32. Valid  
7. Valid   20. Invalid    33. Valid  
8. Valid   21. Valid   34. Valid  
9. Invalid   22. Invalid   35. Valid  
10. Valid   23. Valid  
11. Valid   24. Invalid  
12. Valid   25. Valid  
13. Valid    26. Valid  
 
 
24 
 Chapter 4: Evaluating Inductive Arguments  
 
Strong vs. Weak  
 
As we have seen, an inductive argument is any argu ment claiming either explicitly or implicitly 
that if the premises all are true then the conclusion is probably true though not certain. In logic 
we evaluate inductive arguments as either “strong” or “weak.” An inductive argument is strong 
when it is indee d the case that if the premises are true then the conclusion is probably true though 
not certain, and an inductive argument is weak when it is not the case that if the premises  are true 
then the conclusion is true.  
 
To determine whether an inductive argume nt is strong or weak, ask yourself a hypothetical 
question: If the premises were true (and this need only be asked hypothetically as a thought 
experiment), then would they provide enough information to make it likely that the conclusion is 
true? If “Yes,” then the argument is strong. If “No,” then the argument is weak.  
 
The distinction between strong and weak inductive arguments will become clearer after you have 
examined some examples. The following are all strong inductive arguments.  
 
* Without any except ions, Ed has eaten a Dick’s burger for lunch every day for the past two 
years. Today is an ordinary day. Therefore, Ed will probably eat a Dick’s burger for lunch today, 
although it is not certain.  
* In all of recorded history it has never snowed in San D iego in the month of August. So it 
probably won’t snow next August in San Diego.  
* No human being has ever run a one -minute mile. Ed has never done anything athletic . Thus, it 
is unlikely Ed will run a one -minute mile today when he goes to the track for th e first time.  
* It is 100 degrees outside and the temperature is rising. Ice cream melts at 34 degrees. 
Therefore, if I leave my ice cream cone directly out in the hot Sun right now, it will probably 
melt in less than an hour.  
 
The following are all weak inductive arguments.  
 
* It has been raining for two days in a row. So it will probably be raining every day next month.  
* Jan is from Minnesota. Bob Dylan grew up in Minnesota . Therefore, Jan probably likes Bob 
Dylan’s music.  
* Phat is an artist. Therefore , Phat very likely has an MFA degree from San Francisco State.  
* We interviewed 10 people in front of a Catholic church in Renton, Washington after Mass last 
Sunday and 9 of them said they were Catholic. It follows that probably 90 percent of all 
American s are Catholic.   
 
Notice that each of the eight arguments above is inductive because the claim in each case is that 
the conclusion is probably true if the premises are true. However, some are strong arguments and 
some are weak because some succeed in show ing that their conclusions probably are true if their 
premises are true, and some do not.  
 
25 
 Ask yourself: If the premises were true, would they provide enough information to make it likely 
(i.e., better than 50 percent chance) that the conclusion is true? Y es: The argument is strong. No: 
The argument is weak.  
 
**Practice Problems: Strong and Weak Arguments  
For each of the following inductive arguments, state whether it is strong or weak.  
 
1. Serious biologists will tell you that mice are mammals. Thus mice a re mammals.  
2. It has rained every day in the Darién Gap for the past twenty -five years. Thus it will probably 
rain in the Darién Gap tomorrow.  
3. People try on shoes before buying them. People drive cars before signing up for a three -year 
lease. People ta ke a close look at travel information before committing to an expensive vacation. 
Thus people should have sex with each other before committing to marriage.  
4. Different cultures have different beliefs about morality. Thus there is no objective basis 
outsi de of cultural norms for any moral claim.  
5.  Wei -jin’s math teacher says that God exists. Thus God probably exists.  
6. Two teenagers were found writing graffiti on the school walls yesterday. Thus all teenagers 
are delinquents.  
7. A reliable study showed that 90 percent of Bellevue College’s students want better food in the 
school cafeteria. Latisha is a student at Bellevue College. It follows that Latisha probably wants 
better food at the cafeteria.  
8. Hakim has eaten at Joe’s Café every day for two weeks , and has liked the food each time. 
Hakim plans to go to Joe’s Café tonight for dinner, and on the basis of his past experiences 
concludes that he will likely enjoy this meal, too.  
9. Paul has eaten at Joe’s Café once before for breakfast, and liked the fo od. On that basis, Paul 
concludes that he will love the food at Joe’s Café tonight when he goes there for dinner.  
10. Upon landing at the SeaTac Airport, plane passengers saw broken buildings, large cracks in 
the runway, fire engines running about, and par amedics assisting injured people. The passengers 
concluded that an earthquake just occurred.  
11. A box contains 1000 U.S. coins. Two selected at random were one cent pennies. Thus the 
entire box probably contains nothing but pennies.  
12. An official state parks sign at a beach says, “Attention: Beyond this point you may encounter 
nude sunbathers.” Therefore the beach in front of you is probably sanctioned for clothing -
optional use.  
13. An elderly lady drove 50 miles out of her way to visit the officially sa nctioned clothing -
optional beach at the state park, and complained to the park ranger there that she was offended 
by the nudity she saw through her binoculars. Thus the ranger should arrest every nude sunbather 
at the beach for disorderly conduct.  
14. A sp okeswoman for the nude sunbathers at the officially sanctioned clothing -optional beach 
plans to explain politely to the elderly woman complainant that no one at the beach had broken 
any law. Therefore it is likely that this particular elderly woman will su bsequently and happily 
join the nudists for a game of Frisbee on the beach.  
15. Ranger Dan has listened to the elderly woman’s strident complaint about beach nudity. 
Ranger Dan has also listened to over a dozen nudists shout their points of view regarding the 
elderly woman’s complaint. Ranger Dan works under an incompetent site administrator who 
26 
 demands that Dan resolve all beach user -conflict quickly and in such a way that avoids negative 
media attention. Thus Ranger Dan is probably feeling frustrated.  
 
Answers:  
1. Strong    6. Weak    11. Weak  
2. Strong    7. Strong    12. Strong   
3. Weak    8. Strong    13. Weak  
4. Weak    9. Weak    14. Weak  
5. Weak    10. Strong    15. Strong  
 
Looking for Missing Premises  
 
In far too many cases, when people suspect they are pres enting a weak or invalid argument, they 
leave a key premise out. Often, these key premises —if stated explicitly —would sound 
ridiculous, and make the argument sound equally foolish. Many times the so -called arguer offers 
a rhetorical question instead of a d eclarative premise, forgoing the opportunity to present boldly 
and honestly his or her claims clearly. For example, “There is no objective standard by which 
moral claims may be judged as true or false. For who’s to say what’s right or wrong?” The 
conclusio n here is stated at the beginning clearly, but absolutely no reason is provided for anyone 
to believe it. The rhetorical question offered afterwards is usually expected to elicit a shrug and a 
tacit response of “Gee, I don’t know; there must not be any  point of view with the authority to 
judge moral claims objectively).” But surely the mere fact that the person responding to the 
argument can’t think of a good answer doesn’t show that there is no good answer. Also, the 
question reveals a highly questionable assumption on the part of the arguer that the truth value of 
ethical judgments is determined by some perspective ; but the truth or falsity of the claim that 
“Two plus two equals four” is not determined by a perspective (whether holding power or not, or 
socially constructed or not). It must be shown whether moral truths are analogous to such claims 
or relevantly different. To assume what one is trying to prove begs the question.  
 
When an inductive argument seems patently weak, or a deductive argument seems p atently 
invalid (and none of the clearly stated premises are false), the problem may be that a substantive 
premise is missing. We need to see if the explicitly stated premises by themselves provide good 
reason to believe the conclusion, and if they do not due to a missing premise, we should 
determine what the missing premise must be. We can then take a close look at that premise, and 
determine whether we have good reason to believe it. Those missing premises are often the 
Achilles’ heel of bad arguments.  
 
Consider the following four arguments:  
 
* All dogs are mammals. Thus, all dogs are animals.  
* Either the Senator is a Republican or she’s a Democrat. Thus she’s a Democrat.  
* The norms of our culture include activity X. Thus, people of our culture are moral ly obliged to 
do activity X.  
* No one has come up with a universally accepted object basis for morality. Thus there is no 
objective basis for morality.  
27 
  
In each case, there is a non -trivial, substantive premise missing. The stated premise alone cannot 
give good reason to believe the conclusion. The arguer may believe that the missing premise is 
so obviously true as to be not worth stating explicitly, but the arguer would be thus intellectually 
confused. Whether the missing premise is true or not is often at  the heart of the argument; and 
for at least the second and third examples above, the missing premise claims something that may 
very well be false.  
 
In the first argument, the missing premise is easily found: “All mammals are animals.” This 
claim is both u ndeniably true and something nearly any informed adult will agree to, so the 
arguer is probably not trying to slide something by us. The same is likely the case with the 
second argument. The missing premise is “The Senator is not a Republican.” This kind o f claim 
is easily verified or falsified, so again, the arguer is probably just speaking loosely, and gives us 
little need for serious critical challenge.  
 
The missing premise of the third and fourth arguments, though, make important, substantive 
claims, an d many thoughtful and informed people will disagree with them. For the third 
argument, the missing premise needs to be something like “All activities that are the cultural 
norm for our culture are morally obligatory for people in our culture.” But that’s a  severely 
difficult claim to take seriously. Do we really want to say that because the present norm of our 
culture is (at least partially) racist and sexist that we thereby have a moral duty to be racist and 
sexist (to the present extent)?? Of course not.  
 
The missing premise of the fourth argument needs to be something akin to “If an objective basis 
for morality exists, then someone would have presented it to so that it would be accepted 
universally by now.” But this claim too is highly questionable. There  is no good reason to 
believe that just because everyone has not accepted a particular point of view that there is no 
objectively correct point of view on the subject. Scientists do not yet agree on what causes 
gravitational pull, yet we don’t walk about s aying that there’s nothing objectively true about the 
cause of gravitational attraction.  
 
Once the woefully misguided missing premises of the third and fourth arguments are brought 
into the open, the weakness of the arguments becomes apparent. But people arguing for such 
conclusions often do not want the weakness of their inferences glowing like neon signs in the 
night air. It’s our task as critical thinkers to recognize when important premises are missing, and 
to take them into consideration in determinin g if an argument is successful.  
 
**Practice Problems: Missing Premises  
What substantive premise is missing in each of the following arguments? Note: the missing 
premise may be stated in more than one way.  
 
1. No cats are birds. Thus, Garfield is not a bird . 
2. Sue says that Mars is larger than Venus. Thus, Mars is larger than Venus.  
3. If Bob is a mouse, then Bob is a mammal. Thus Bob is not a mouse.  
4. If Camila is a logician, then Camila is a philosopher. Hence, Camila is a philosopher.  
28 
 5. The sign outsid e our school is authoritative and informative. Thus we can believe that this 
school is Bellevue College.  
6. Zahra goes to class every day and studies regularly, and she gets pretty good grades. Thus, 
Alina probably gets pretty good grades, too.  
7. A strong  wind storm is coming to our town tomorrow morning. Thus the rowing regatta 
scheduled for tomorrow on our town’s lake will probably be canceled.  
8. Alejandro is not from Argentina. Thus he’s from Peru.  
9. If Giulia is from Rabat, then she is from Morocco. Thus, if Giulia is from Rabat, then she is 
from North Africa.  
10. I did not receive what I asked for in my prayer to God. Thus God does not exist.  
11. Pastor Bustle is a social conservative. Thus he is a Republican.  
12. Senator Sunny Shine is a nudist. Thu s she is liberal.  
13. All social conservatives want to see nudists put in jail. Thus, Bustle wants to see nudists put 
in jail.  
14. Sunny Shine is willing to break a law to promote publically her family’s lifestyle. Thus, 
Shine is an anarchist and has no re spect for social order.  
15. Knowledge of Sunny Shine’s backyard skinny -dipping will bother some people. Thus Sunny 
Shine should be put in jail.  
 
Answers:  
1. Garfield is a cat.  
2. Sue is  authoritative on Mars and Venus.  
3. Bob is not a mammal.  
4. Camila is a logician.  
5. The sign outside our school says that this is Bellevue College.  
6. Alina goes to class every day and studies regularly.  
7. If a strong wind storm comes to our town tomorrow, then the scheduled rowing regatta will be 
canceled.  
8. Alejandro is  either from Argentina or Peru.  
9. If Giulia is from Morocco, then she is from North Africa.  
10. If I do not receive what I ask for in my prayer to God, then God does not exist.  
11. All social conservatives are Republicans.  
12. All nudists are liberals.  
13. Bustle is a social conservative.  
14. Anyone willing to break a law to promote publically his or her family’s lifestyle is an 
anarchist and has no respect for social order.  
15. If an activity bothers some people, those engaged in that activity should be p ut in jail.
29 
  
Chapter 5: Deductive Soundness and Inductive Cogency  
 
We now  need to bring truth and the real world back into our discussion. Recall that a statement 
makes a claim that is either true or false (never both, and never neither). A statement is true if 
and only if its claim corresponds to, that is, describes  the relevant portion of reality; it is “false” 
if the claim does not correspond to reality. That is a definition of truth. Let’s look at some 
examples. The following statements correspond to re ality:  
The Earth is (roughly) round.  
The Moon has mountains.  
The Sun is presently over one hundred miles away from the Earth . 
 
The following statements obviously do not correspond to reality.  
 
Richard Nixon was President of the United States on January 1, 2012.  
The Earth as a whole is flat as a pancake.  
The Sun is only 100 miles away from Mars.  
 
The definition just presented, called the “correspondence theory of truth,” was first formulated in 
the West by the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle (384 -322 B.C .). Ancient and medieval 
philosophers from India and China also agreed with the correspondence theory with near 
unanimity, as do most contemporary philosophers around the world  today . Moreover, it’s what 
most folks walking the streets today will believe, e ven if they do not presently know how to 
articulate the position. (Debate on this issue is important to the philosophic field of 
epistemology , however .) You may have noticed that the  correspondence theory presupposes a 
distinction between the claim  express ed by a statement, and an extra -linguistic reality existing 
beyond the statement, a reality that is “there” independently of language (and a statement is true 
if and only if its claim corresponds to that reality). Someone can say, for example, “Adult 
eleph ants are larger than adult mice,” but saying or believing so does not make it true; the claim 
expressed by this statement is true if and only if it correctly describes or corresponds to the 
relevant part of reality, an extra -linguistic part of reality, a r eality beyond the sentence, namely, 
all adult elephants  and adult mice .  
  
Correspondence t heory  enters logical theory via the concept of soundness. A deductive argument 
is sound if and only if it is both valid  and has all true premises. A deductive argume nt that is not 
sound is unsound. In other words, in order to qualify as sound, a deductive argument must satisfy 
two conditions:  
 
1. It is valid.  
2. All of its premises are true.  
 
Or, “Sound = Valid + True premises.”  
 
30 
 An inductive argument is cogent if a nd only if it is both strong  and has all true premises. An 
inductive argument that is not cogent is uncogent. In other words, in order to qualify as cogent, 
an inductive argument must satisfy two conditions:  
 
1. It is strong.  
2. All of its premises are tr ue. 
 
Or, “Cogent = Strong + True premises.”  
 
The following deductive argument is valid but not sound:  
 
All squirrels are fish.  
All fish are good swimmers.  
So, all squirrels must be good swimmers.  
 
The following deductive argument is sound:  
 
All whales a re mammals.  
No mammals are reptiles.  
So, no whales are reptiles.  
 
The following inductive argument is strong but uncogent:  
 
The air temperature has been over 300 degrees F in New York City for ten straight weeks with 
no change in sight.  
Therefore, the a ir temperature will probably be over 300 degrees F in New York City tomorrow.  
 
The following inductive argument is cogent:  
 
The temperature at the surface of the Sun has been over 100 degrees F for ten straight weeks 
with no change in sight.  
Therefore, i t will probably be over 100 degrees F on the surface of the Sun tomorrow.  
 
The soundness or cogency of an argument does not depend on my (or your) knowing if the 
premises of the argument are true. Soundness and cogency depends (in part) on whether the 
prem ises are actually true or not. And we may not know if premises  are true or false in many 
cases, or we may disagree on such matters. This does not make the argument’s soundness or 
cogency “relative to our point of view”; it simply means that in some cases w e will not be able to 
know or agree upon the ultimate assessment of the argument. Consider the following deductive 
argument:  
 
There is a mou ntain on Pluto 3000 meters high . Thus , there is a mountain on Pluto over 2000 
meters high.  
 
31 
 As logicians, we can be confident that this argument is valid, for a 3000 -meter -high mountain i s 
definitely higher than a 2000 -meter -high mountain. If the premise is true, then the conclusion is 
guaranteed. But is the argument sound? We do not know if the premise is true or not. We are 
presently ignorant of this matter  given the limitations of today’s technology in astronomy. This 
does not make the argument sound or unsound; it simply means that although we can tell (being 
students of logic) that the argument is valid, we cannot t ell if it is sound or unsound. No problem. 
We’re simply ignorant and don’t know everything there is to know.  
 
Now consider this additional argument:  
 
Each  person has a guardian angel.  
The U.S. president is a person.  
Thus, the U.S. president has a guardian angel.  
 
Valid or invalid? Well, if the premises are true, then it’s impossible  for the conclusion to be 
false;  so the argument is clearly valid. Basic knowledge of logic can tell us this much. But is the 
argument sound or unsound? Hm. Some people believe in guardian angels, and will think the 
premises are both true. Others do not believe in guardian angels, and will think the first premise 
false. If the angel believers are correct, then the argument is actually sound. If those not believing 
in guardian ang els are correct, then the argument is actually unsound. But both groups cannot be 
correct at the same time. Guardian angels (whatever we mean by such heavenly creatures) either 
exist or not, and our belief about them won’t make them pop into or out of exis tence. Belief does 
not imply reality here. For me to say, “What’s true for me is true for me, and what’s true for you 
is true for you,” is just an intellectually lazy way of saying I believe one thing, and you believe 
something else (perhaps the opposite o f what I believe). That’s fine; people can have differing 
beliefs; but let’s not confuse what someone believes with reality. It would be great if our beliefs 
matched up with reality on a regular basis, but as the intellectually alert among us will have 
recognized, we each have had false beliefs before (and likely even today).  
 
So, what shall we make of this guardian angel argument? It’s clearly valid, but it looks like the 
two groups talking about it will disagree on whether the argument is sound or unsound . They 
can’t both be correct in this judgment, but they are presently unable to convince the other side of 
their position. The best they may be able to do here is to agree to disagree. The sharpest in each 
group, however, will refrain from thinking that th e soundness of the argument is relative to the 
group’s belief about angels. What’s relative is their belief about the soundness of the argument, 
and that’s a substantially different matter.  
 
Given a ll this  said about mountains on Pluto and guardian angels flitting about our shoulders we 
are, for the purposes of this course, going to focus our discussions primarily on things that nearly 
all of us will agree to exist (e.g., cats and U.S. presidents) or not to exist (e.g., vampires and 
square circles).  
  
**Pra ctice Problems: Deductive Soundness and Inductive Cogency  
For each of the following arguments, determine three things: (a) whether it is deductive or 
inductive, (b) whether it is valid or invalid (if deductive), or strong or weak (if inductive), and (c) 
32 
 whether it is sound or unsound (if deductive), or cogent or uncogent (if inductive).  
 
1. All rats are mammals, and no mammals are fish. Thus it is necessary that no rats are fish.  
2. Paris is in France, and France is in Africa. Hence it must be the case that  Paris is in Africa.  
3. No human has ever swum across the Atlantic Ocean. The president of the USA is a human. 
Thus the president of the USA will likely not swim across the Atlantic Ocean.  
4. Mexico City’s human population is today well over 1000. Thus it is guaranteed that the human 
population today of Mexico City is over 500.  
5. India is north of the Antarctic. It follows that the Antarctic is south of India.  
6. Beijing —the capitol of China —is a large, famous, and interesting city. Thus Beijing probably 
receives at most a dozen tourists a year.  
7. Highly respected physicists say that it is important to learn math in order to excel at advanced 
physics. Thus it is important to learn math to excel at advanced physics.  
8. Different cultures have different beli efs about morality. Thus it is certain that there is nothing 
absolute or objective about morality.  
9. Our moral beliefs are produced through environmental conditioning. Thus is highly likely that 
there is nothing absolute or objective about morality.  
10. T hinkers have yet to agree on an absolute or objective basis for morality. Thus it is certain 
that there is no absolute or objective basis for morality.  
11. It has never snowed in the mountains of Tibet. Thus it will not likely snow there this year.  
12. The  USA has never elected a woman as president of the country. Thus in the next election, 
the USA will likely elect a woman as president of the country.  
13. In 1950, basketball star Michael Jordan was president of Argentina. All basketball players 
are athlete s. Thus in 1950, Argentina had an athlete as president.  
14. The capitol of Costa Rica is San Jose. The capitol of Panama is Panama City. Most of Costa 
Rica is north of Panama. Thus it is certain that San Jose is north of Panama City.  
15. Ethiopia is north of Kenya, and Kenya is north of Botswana. Therefore it is guaranteed that 
Ethiopia is (at least in part) north of Botswana.  
 
Answers:  
1. Deductive, valid, sound  
2. Deductive, valid, unsound  
3. Inductive, strong, cogent  
4. Deductive, valid, sound  
5. Deducti ve, valid, sound  
6. Inductive, weak, uncogent  
7. Inductive, strong, cogent  
8. Deductive, invalid, unsound  
9. Inductive, weak, uncogent  
10. Deductive, invalid, unsound  
11. Inductive, strong, uncogent  
12. Inductive, weak, uncogent  
13. Deductive, valid, unsou nd 
14. Deductive, invalid, unsound  
15. Deductive, valid, sound  
33 
 Chapter 6: The Counterexample Method  
 
Suppose some people present a deductive argument and believe it’s valid although their 
argument is actually invalid. Suppose they insist their argument is  valid even when everybody is 
telling them their argument is logical junk. How can you show these blighted fools their error? 
One way is called the Counterexample Method. Recall that a deductive argument claims that if 
the premises are true then the conclu sion must be true. A counterexample to a deductive 
argument is a description of a possible circumstance in which the premises of the argument are 
clearly true while the argument’s conclusion is clearly false. When you present a counterexample 
to someone’s deductive argument, you help him or her see one way in which the premises of the 
argument could be true while the conclusion is false. In other words, you show that the argument 
is invalid.  
 
For instance, suppose someone proposes the following deductive a rgument and stubbornly insists 
it’s valid:  
Aya is Jane’s biological mother.  
Aya is married to Tom.  
Therefore, it’s guaranteed that Tom  is Jane’s biological father.   
 
This is a deductive argument, since it claims that the conclusion must be true if the pr emises are 
true. But the following counterexample shows that this is an invalid  deductive argument:  
 
It is possible  that Aya gave birth to Jane before ever meeting Tom. Perhaps Aya married Tom 
after Jane had already grown up , gone off to college , majored in dance, and got a job at Kinko’s .  
 
This shows that the argument’s structure allows for the possibility of the premises being true 
with the conclusion being false. This is a counterexample to the argument. Note: The mere 
possibility  that the premises are  true and the conclusion is false shows that this deductive 
argument is invalid, for a deductive argument is invalid if there is any possibility at all, no matter 
how unlikely, that the premises could be true and the conclusion false.  
 
Here is another inva lid argument, although people commonly mistake it for a valid inference.  
 
Some dogs are brown animals.  
Thus, some dogs are not brown animals.  
 
The structure of this argument is:  
 
Some D are A  
Some D are not A  
 
If we replace the D with “ bears ,” and replace the A  with “ mammals ,” we’d get the following 
counterexample containing a premise that is clearly true and a conclusion that is clearly false.  
 
34 
 Some bears  are mammals . 
Some bears  are not mammals . 
 
Since the structure of the original argument allows for a t rue premise and a false conclusion, it is 
by definition invalid, as will be any argument of this structure.  
 
Your friend’s following invalid argument requires a little more effort to dislodge from his 
intellectually blinkered mind:  
 
If it’s snowing outside , then the picnic will be canceled. And our picnic is indeed canceled. Thus 
it must be snowing outside.  
 
What we need to do here is to replace entire statements  with other statements  so that the 
premises are clearly true and the conclusion is clearly false . You could respond to your friend as 
follows:  
 
“Look good buddy, your argument is illogical. It’s just like arguing this way: ‘If I’m a one -
month -old baby boy, then I’m a human. But I’m not a one -month -old baby boy. Thus I’m not a 
human.’ That’s just nuts ! The two premises are obviously true, while the conclusion is obviously 
false. Any argument with that pattern will be invalid.”  
 
With all this in mind, let’s outline a simple procedure for showing invalid deductive argument to 
be indeed invalid . We’ll foc us first on deductive arguments made up of categorical statements . 
Such statements begin with “All,” “No,” or “Some,” and contain two terms  each.  A term is a 
plural word or phrase that picks out a class of things. Oftentimes terms are made up of plural 
nouns or phrases like “dogs,” “black dogs,” or “black dogs that bark in the night.” Words that 
describe things or actions —like adjectives (e.g., “black,” “fast,” “unscrupulous”) or adverbs 
(e.g., “swiftly,” “bravely”) —do not point to or pick out a class of t hings, and thus are not terms.  
 
Categorical statements come (technically speaking) in the following four patterns (with S and P 
used to abbreviate terms):  
 
All S are P  
No S are P  
Some S are P  
Some S are not P  
 
The words “All,” “No,” and “Some” are called t he statement’s quantifier . The connectors “are” 
and “are not” are called the statement’s copula . The term referred to as “S” is called the 
statement’s subject term , while the term at the end of the statement and referred to here as “P” is 
called the predic ate term . Vocabulary is a wonderful thing.  
 
Note also that the word “some” in logic means “at least one.” So it is true that some dogs are 
animals, because at least one dog is an animal. The fact that all dogs are animals does not 
contradict the claim that  at least one of them is.  
35 
  
We’ll call arguments made up of categorical statements and that have only one premise 
immediate inferences . Also, we’ll call arguments made up of categorical statements and that 
have two premises categorical syllogisms . The count erexample method provides an easy, 
intuitive, and polemically useful procedure to show that invalid deductive arguments of these 
two types are indeed invalid.  
 
Beforehand, for clarity’s sake and by convention, we’ll rewrite arguments containing two terms 
that (in the argument’s context) clearly refer to the same thing, reducing the two terms to one.  
Consider the following argument : 
 
We can conclude that some striped tigers are not angr y lions, because some cats are striped 
tigers, and some felines are angry  lions.  
 
We need to notice that the two terms cats and felines  surely refer to the same thing, so let’s just 
pick one of the terms (it doesn’t matter which) and use it consistently in both instances. We then 
get the following wording.  
 
We can conclude that  some striped tigers are not angry lions, because some cats are striped 
tigers, and some cats are angry lions.  
 
Step 1: W e can dispense with the premise and conclusion indicator words, and label each 
premise with P: and the conclusion with  C:. We then repl ace each term consistently with a single 
upper -case letter to show the structure of the argument. If you have two terms that begin with the 
same letter, then select two different capital letters for the two different terms. Step 2 is an easy 
task, but it s hows your understanding of the structure of the argument.  
 
C: Some S are not A  
P: Some C are S  
P: Some C are A  
 
Step 2: Now comes the fun, creative part. Replace each upper -case letter with a simple, easy -to-
understand term of your own choosing so that the  premises are obviously true and the conclusion 
is obviously false. Be sure not to use the same capital letter to stand for two different terms (e.g., 
don’t use “A” to stand for both “animals” and “aardvarks”). Make it so obvious that your 
confused and uni nformed friend who offered the invalid argument in the first place will agree 
readily that your premises are true and conclusion is false. Once you’ve done so, you’ll have 
shown that the argument’s structure allows for true premises and a false conclusion;  by 
definition, that means the argument is invalid. And since your invalid counterexample argument 
has the same structure as your friend’s original argument, the original argument must  be invalid, 
too. There will be an infinite number of options open to yo u in selecting terms. Three ways of 
making the above argument’s premises true and the conclusion false include:  
 
C: Some dogs are not animals  (obviously false!)  
P: Some poodles are dogs  (obviously true!)  
36 
 P: Some poodles are animals  (obviously true!)  
 
C: So me trees are not plants  
P: Some pines are trees  
P: Some pines are plants  
 
C: Some boys are not humans  
P: Some 10 -year-old children are boys  
P: Some 10-year-old children are humans  
 
Notice how the terms are simple and easy to understand. There is nothing co ntroversial here that 
might motivate your intellectually -challenged friend to get sidetracked into a weird discussion 
about the meaning of words or the ontology of Nothingness. Avoid using terms that might 
confuse or allow for ambiguous interpretations. Ke ep it simple!  
 
Other tips:  
 
* When possible, use simple, single -word plural nouns (e.g., rocks, dogs, cats, tigers) that have 
one clear meaning.  
* It’s often easiest to begin with the conclusion, fill in the two “blanks” there first making the 
conclusion c learly false, plug those two terms into the equivalent blanks of the premises, and 
then think of a remaining term that will fit in the remaining two blanks making the two premises 
clearly true.  
 
Here’s another example, this time examining an invalid immedi ate inference:  
 
All meat -eaters are loyal Americans. Thus all loyal Americans are carnivores.  
 
We note that “meat -eaters” and “carnivores” are easily understood as referring to the same thing, 
so we’ll select one term to use (“meat -eaters”).  
 
Step 1: We re place the two terms with single upper -case letters of our choosing, although the 
first or key letter from each term is a good choice.  
 
P: All M are L  
C: All L are M  
 
Step 2: We replace the single capital letters in Step 1 with simple terms of our own choos ing to 
make for a clearly true premise and a clearly false conclusion.  
 
P: All dogs are animals  
C: All animals are do gs 
 
Here, “M” is replaced with “dogs,” and “L” is replaced with “animals.” The premise is obviously 
true, and the conclusion is obviously false. This counterexample is thus clearly invalid, so the 
37 
 original argument is also invalid (and thus unsound, and thus worthy of being rejected as a bad 
inference).  
 
The Counterexample Method may be used on any deductive argument, although sometimes it 
gets a little trickier. Consider the following argument that looks at first like a categorical 
syllogism.  
 
Some dogs are poodles. Some dogs are white. Thus some dogs are white poodles.  
 
Here, the words “dogs” and poodles” are terms, but the word “white” is an adjective. Moreover, 
the argument does not quite have the structure of a categorical syllogism. The use of an adjective 
and the structure of the conclusion are making this deductive argument something a little 
different. Abbreviated, the argument looks like this:  
 
P: Some D are P  
P: Some D are W  
C: Some D are WP  
 
To use the Counterexample Method in this case, we need to replace D and P with simple terms, 
and replace the W with an adjective (again making the premises obviously true and the 
conclusion obvi ously false). One way to do this is:  
 
P: Some cats are females  
P: Some cats are male  
C: Some cats are male females  
 
or 
 
P: Some men are nice people  
P: Some men are mean  
C: Some men are mean nice people  
 
Consider the following more complex invalid deductive  argument:  
 
All baseball players who are right fielders are athletes who are sport fans. Hence, all baseball 
players are sport fans.  
 
This one -premise argument is an immediate inference, but the premise is more complex than a 
standard -form categorical stat ement. Still, we can use the Counterexample Method to show that 
it is invalid.  
 
P: All B who are R are A who are S  
C: All B are S  
 
38 
 Given the use of “who” in the argument, we should limit our choice of terms to those referring to 
people. One combination of a true premise and a false conclusion is:  
 
P: All women who are mothers are females who are people who have given birth.  
C: All women are people who have given birth.  
 
Sometimes even a potentially easy problem can be meddlesome. Consider the following exam ple 
of an invalid argument to the left and its abbreviation to the right:  
 
P: No poodles are mice .   P: No P  are M  
P: All poodles are dogs .   P: All P are D  
C: No mice are dogs .    C: No M are D  
 
It might be easiest to begin by  filling in the two conclusio n blanks to make the conclusion false ; 
here we can replace  “M” with “ animals ,” and replace  “D” with “ dogs .” We’d then want to be 
consistent and replace the other “M ” with “ animals,” and replace the other “D ” with “ dogs .” 
We’d then have the following:  
 
P: No P are animals  
P: All P are dogs  
C: No animals are dogs  
 
The problem we’d face here is that w hatever we use to replace the “P ” in the first premise to 
make the premise true, will not provide a true claim for the second pre mise. If we replace the 
first “P ” with “ rocks ,” the first premise would be true,  but when we then replace the “P ” in th e 
second premise with “rocks ” to be consistent, that second premise ends up being false. We’re 
gummed up because whatever is true of no animals  (e.g., being a rock, being  a ballpoint pen ) 
would be false  of dogs . 
 
Does this mean the argument is valid? Not necessarily. What we need to do is go back to the 
beginning of Step 2 and plug in different terms for the conclusion.  Soon enough, you’ll see how 
to juggle simple terms t o get all the blanks to fill in properly. Oftentimes a ll we need to do is 
exchange the two terms we initially used in the conclusion  in Step 2 . If switching our choice of 
terms still makes for a false conclusion, the rest of the procedure usually works out  smoothly. 
For example:  
 
P: No cats are dogs  (True!)  
P: All cats are anima ls (True!)  
C: No dogs are animals  (False!)  
 
The argument’s structure does indeed allow for true premises and a false conclusion; that is, it is 
possible given this structure to have true premises and a false conclusion. The argument is 
therefore invalid . 
 
39 
 Sometimes if we hit the kind of “brick wall” above and we see that we can’t possibly fill in the 
final two blanks with a single term so that both premises are clearly true, what we n eed to do is 
go back and try a different pair of terms to create the initial false conclusion. We’ve seen that 
simply switching the two terms might work. Another option is to go from using two terms of 
unequal size (note that “animals” contains a much bigg er set of things than “dogs”) to two terms 
of equal size (e.g., “dogs and “cats”); or vice versa. The bottom line is that doing Step 2 of the 
Counterexample Method on categorical syllogisms should be easy and take no more than 15 or 
30 seconds to complete.  If it takes much longer, it may be best to simply start off with a different 
choice of two terms when making the conclusion false.  
 
Some deductive arguments contain no categorical statements. Consider the following invalid 
argument:  
 
If Snoopy [the Peanut s cartoon character] is a dog, then Snoopy is mammal. Snoopy is a 
mammal. Thus Snoopy is a dog.  
 
Here we are working in part with simple statements, with two of them combined in the first 
premise. In this kind of case, instead of replacing terms with a sin gle capital letter, we replace 
entire simple statements with a capital letter. Here we’d get:  
 
P: If D, then M  
P: M  
C: D  
 
Here “D” stands for “Snoopy is a dog,” and “M” stands for “Snoopy is a mammal. Our next step 
is to replace these capital letters with simple statements of our choosing so that the premises are 
obviously true and the conclusion is obviously false. The following should do it:  
 
P: If Lassie [the dog from 1950s television show] is a cat, then Lassie is an animal.  
P: Lassie is an animal.  
C: Lassie is a cat.  
 
It’s certainly true that if Lassie is a cat, then Lassie would be an animal; that’s true of each 
student in this course, as well as the computer you are using right now. Also, the second premise 
is clearly true, and the conclusion is clear ly false. The argument’s structure allows for true 
premises and a false conclusion, so it’s invalid . 
 
One final note. Suppose that you work for 10, 15, or 60 minutes on an argument, and you can’t 
seem to fill in the blanks so that the conclusion is false a nd the premises are true. Does that show 
that the argument is valid ? No. It might be the case that you’re simply not up to speed today, or 
that the argument is complex in some fashion. Not successfully filling in the blanks proves 
nothing; but if you do fill in the blanks so that the premises are true and the conclusion is false, 
then you’ve proved the argument to be invalid. The Counterexample Method is thus only useful 
for showing that invalid arguments are indeed invalid; it cannot show that valid argume nts are 
valid. For that, we’ll need other techniques to be learned later.  
40 
  
**Practice Problems: The Counterexample Method  
Use the t wo-step Counterexample Method to show that the following arguments are invalid.  
 
1. Some tigers are striped animals. Thus, al l striped animals are tigers.  
2. Some birds that fly through jungles are not green animals, because some green animals are not 
birds that fly through jungles.  
3. All the men in my biology class are funny people. Thus, all the humorous people in my 
biology class are men.  
4. All parrots are birds. All parrots are animals. Thus , all birds are beasts.  
5. All pit bulls are mammals, since some dangerous dogs are pit bulls, and because some 
dangerous dogs are mammals.  
6. No people learning logic are completely ir rational people. Some logic students are 
mathematicians. It follows that some completely irrational people are not mathematicians.  
7. No eagles are mammals. Thus, since no mammals are fish, no eagles are fish.  
8. Some dogs are not pigs, because some pigs a re animals and some animals are not dogs.  
9. If it’s raining outside, then the ground is wet. But it’s not raining outside. Consequently, the 
ground is not wet. 
10. All chess players with a high USCF rating are either chess masters or chess fans. Thus all 
chess players are chess fans.  
11. If Fischer was superior to Spassky, then Fischer could have beaten Karpov. If Kasparov was 
the world’s best chess player, then Fischer could have beaten Karpov. Thus, if Fischer was 
superior to Spassky, then Fischer could have beaten Karpov.  
12. All black dogs are mammals. Thus all dogs are mammals.  
 
Answers: (with proposed changes when needed, followed by the two steps of the method, with 
an illustration of one of many possible counterexamples)  
1. P: Some tigers are stripe d animals.   P: Some T are S  
 C: All striped animals are tigers.   C: All S are T  
 
 Counterexample:  P: Some dogs  are animals . 
    C: All animals are dogs . 
 
2. P: Some green animals are not birds that fly through jungles.  P: Some G are not B  
 C: Some birds t hat fly through jungles are not green animals.  C: Some B are not G  
 
 Counterexample:  P: Some animals are not dogs.  
    C: Some dogs are not animals.  
 
3. P: All the men in my biology class are funny people.   P: All M are F  
 C: All the funny people in my bi ology class are men.   C: All F are M  
 
 Counterexample:  P: All cats are animals.  
    C: All animals are cats.  
 
41 
 4. P: All parrots are birds.   P: All P are B  
 P: All parrots are animals.   P: All P are A  
 C: All birds are animals.   C: All B are A  
 
 Counterexam ple: P: All poodles are animals.  
    P: All poodles are dogs.  
    C: All animals are dogs.  
 
5. C: All pit bulls are mammals.     C: All P are M  
 P: Some dangerous dogs are pit bulls.   P: Some D are P  
 P: Some dangerous dogs are mammals.   P: Some D are M  
  
 Counterexample:  C: All lions are tigers.  
    P: Some cats are lions.  
    P: Some cats are tigers.  
     
6. P: No logic students are completely irrational people.   P: No L are C  
 P: Some logicians are mathematicians.     P: Some L are M  
 C: Some completely ir rational people are not mathematicians.  C: Some C are not M  
 
 Counterexample:  P: No dogs are cats.  
    P: Some dogs are animals.  
    C: Some cats are not animals.  
 
7. P: No eagles are mammals.   P: No E are M  
 P: No mammals are fish.   P: No M are F  
 C: No eagles are fish.    C: No E are F  
  
 Counterexample:  P: No tigers are monkeys.  
    P: No monkeys are cats.  
    C: No tigers are cats.  
 
8. C: Some dogs are not pigs.   C: Some D are not P  
 P: Some pigs are animals.   P: Some P are A  
 P: Some animals are not do gs. P: Some A are not D  
 
 Counterexample:  C: Some cats are not mammals.  
    P: Some mammals are bears.  
    P: Some bears are not cats.  
     
9. P: If it’s raining outside, then the ground is wet.  
 P: It’s not raining outside.  
 C: The ground is not wet. 
 
 P: If R, then G    P: If Lassie is a cat, then Lassie is a mammal.  
42 
  P: not -R   P: Lassie is not a cat.      
 C: not -G   C: Lassie is not a mammal.  
 
10. P: All chess players with a high USCF rating are either chess masters or chess fans.  
 C: All chess players a re chess fans.  
 
 P: All P with H are either M or F  
 C: All P are F  
 
 P: All women with children are either females or space ships.  
 C: All women are space ships.  
 
11. P: If Fischer was superior to Spassky, then Fischer could have beaten Karpov.  
 P: If Kasp arov was the world’s best chess player, then Fischer could have beaten Karpov. 
 C: If Fischer was superior to Spassky, then Kasparov was the world’s best chess player.  
  
 P: If S, then B  
 P: If W, then B  
 C: If S, then W  
 
 P: If Lassie [the TV dog] is a sa lmon, then Lassie is a fish.  
 P: If Lassie is a shark, then Lassie is a fish.  
 C:  If Lassie is a salmon, then Lassie is a shark.  
 
12. P: All black dogs are mammals.   P: All BD are M  
 C: All dogs are mammals.    C: All D are M  
   
    P: All married women ar e wives.  
    C: All women are wives.  
43 
 Chapter 7: Fallacies  
 
A fallacy  is an argument that is logically bad but often psychologically persuasive. 
Advertisements trying to convince you to buy a new shade of lipstick are often fallacious: they 
offer no logica lly good reason to believe that you need or should buy that lipstick, yet such ads 
(if effective) can convince you that you simply must buy it nonetheless or face a life of social 
penury  fit only for a troll.  
 
Fallacies fall into two camps: formal and info rmal.  A formal fallacy is a psychologically 
persuasive but logically bad argument whose problem reveals itself to the keen eye of logic 
students through its form, or structure. The logical problem with an informal fallacy lies in its 
content, that is, in what the premise is claiming, and not merely in the argument’s structure. We 
will in this section of the text speak most thoroughly about informal fallacies. A few words on 
formal fallacies are warranted, though.  
 
Formal Fallacies  
 
There are a number of fo rmal fallacies, but two are quite common and often trip up the 
sleepwalking  thinker. Consider beforehand the logically good (i.e., valid) argument known by 
logicians as Modus Ponens (Latin: “the affirming mode”):  
 
If A, then B  
A 
Thus , B 
 
An example of a Mo dus Ponens argument about the famous American dog and star of 1950s 
television, Lassie, would be:  
 
If Lassie is a dog, then Lassie is an animal.  
Lassie is a dog.  
Thus, Lassie is an animal.  
 
This argument is valid because it is impossible for the premises t o be true and (at the same time 
and with the same meaning) for the conclusion to be false. We can see this even if we had never 
heard of Lassie or knew that she was a dog. The premises here are guaranteeing that the 
conclusion is true, and only a valid arg ument can do that. Consider, however, the following 
invalid argument:  
 
If Lassie is a dog, then Lassie is an animal.  
Lassie is an animal.  
Thus, Lassie is a dog.  
 
This argument is invalid because it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion  
false. The premises (an d conclusion) happen to be true , but the information in the two premises 
does not by itself guarantee the conclusion. It is possible that Lassie is an animal (the claim of 
44 
 the second premise), and all dogs may very well be animals ( implied by the first premise), but 
for all we know from the premises, Lassie may be a bird or a cat (with the premise s holding 
true), so the conclusion fails to be guaranteed.  
 
This pattern of invalid argument is so common that it’s been given a name: Affirming the 
Consequent . The name comes from the vocabulary of “if, then” statements: the “if” part is called 
the antecedent ; the “then” part is called the consequent .  
 
In Affirming the Consequent, one premise is a conditional statement of the form “If…, the n….” 
A second premise (provided beforehand or afterwards) affirms the consequent of the conditional. 
The arguer improperly concludes with the affirmation of the antecedent. All arguments of this 
pattern are invalid, and are said to be formally fallacious. We don’t even need to know what the 
argument is about to see its fallaciousness. For example, a ll the following are guilty of Affirming 
the Consequent  even though we don’t know if the premises are actually true or false:  
 
If H, then O   L   If K, then not -U  Not-R 
O   If M, then L   Not-U    If not -G, then not -R 
Hence, H   Therefore, M   Thus, K    Thus, not -G 
 
A second common formal fallacy is called Denying the Antecedent . Its structure looks like this 
(with the two premises and conclusion arranged in any orde r): 
 
If A, then B  
Not-A 
Thus , not-B 
 
An example of this invalid line of reasoning is this:  
 
If it’s raining outside, then the ground is wet.  
It’s not raining outside.  
Thus, the ground is not wet.  
 
Surely the two premises do not guarantee the conclusion, as  it’s quite possible for it to have been 
raining he avily five minutes ago (or sprinklers are on, or a pack of territory -marking dogs had 
recently walked by) and the  ground  still be wet. The following are examples of Denying the 
Antecedent. You might compar e them to the Affirming the Consequent examples above. In each 
case below, there is a conditional statement along with a shorter one that denies what the 
conditional has as its antecedent. The conclusion is then the denial of the consequent.  
 
If H, then O   Not-M   If K, then not -U   Not-G 
Not-H   If M, then L   Not-K     If G, then R 
Hence, not -O  Therefore, not -L Thus, not-not-U   Thus, not-R 
 
What makes Denying the Antecedent tricky for many people is its resemblance to a common 
valid form of reasoning cal led Modus Tollens  (Latin: “the denying mode”):  
45 
  
If A, then B  
Not-B 
Thus , not-A 
 
For example,  
 
If it’s raining outside, then the ground is wet.  
It’s false that the ground is wet (i.e., it’s dry as a bone).  
Thus, it is false that it’s raining outside.  
 
Here,  with Modus Tollens, it is impossible for the premises to be true and at the same time for 
the conclusion to be false. All arguments in this form will be valid, just like all arguments in the 
forms of Affirming the Consequent or Denying the Antecedent will  be invalid.  
 
Formal fallacies are found among  invalid deductive arguments. It’s usually not the structure of 
an inductive argument that makes it weak. With induction, the weakness relates to the content of 
the argument. Consider the following two inductiv e appeals to authority:  
 
My four -year-old niece (who has never studied botany or native plants) says that the scientific 
name for coast redwood trees is Sequoia sempervirens . Thus, the scientific name for coast 
redwood trees is Sequoia sempervirens . 
 
Each botany professor in Pacific Rim universities says that the scientific name for coast redwood 
trees is Sequoia sempervirens . Thus, the scientific name for coast redwood trees is Sequoia 
sempervirens . 
 
The two arguments have the same structure:  
 
X says Z.  
Thus, Z is true.  
 
Looking at the structure, howe ver, does not let us know if either  argument is strong or weak; we 
need to examine the content . Only then can we determine if the authorities we appeal to are 
sufficiently authoritative on the subject of redwoo d trees. Formal fallacies can be recognized as 
such without knowing any of this content; all we need to see is the argument’s form. That’s what 
makes them formal  fallacies. To recognize an informal  fallacy, we need to know the content of 
the argument, and know how it may or may not provide good reason to believe the conclusion. In 
the next section, we’ll examine 20 common informal fallacies.  
 
**Practice Problems: Formal Fallacies  
Determine whether the following arguments are examples of Modus Ponens, Modus Tollens, 
Affirming the Consequent, Denying the Antecedent, or something else (the name of which you 
don’t need to know here).  
 
46 
 1. If Jack likes fruit, Jack likes apples. Jack does indeed like fruit. Thus, Jack likes apples.  
2. If Sally likes oranges, then Sally likes fruit. Sally likes fruit. Thus Sally likes oranges.  
3. If Jugo is a logician, then Jugo understands fallacies. Jugo is not a logician. Hence, Jugo does 
not understand fallacies.  
4. Either Pat is a baseball player or a football player. Pat is no t a baseball player. Therefore, Pat 
is a football player.  
5. If Laura starred in the movie Logicians are Hot!, then Laura is an actress. But Laura is not an 
actress. Thus, Laura did not star in the movie Logicians are Hot!  
6. If Joipl is ghjkl, then Joipl is qwert. Joipl is ghjkl. Thus, Joipl is qwert.  
7. If June is tall, then Tim is 30 years old. But Tim is 30 years old. Thus June is tall.  
8. Bob Marley was not a member of the Beatles. If Bob Marley was a member of the Beatles, 
then Bob Marley knows Ringo Starr. Thus, Bob Marley does not know Ringo Starr.  
9. Olga is French. If Olga was born and reared in France, then Olga is French. So, Olga was born 
and reared in France.  
10. If Carrie is from Canada, then Mel is from Mexico. If Mel is from Mexico, then Pat ty is from 
Panama. Thus if Carrie is from Canada, then Patty is from Panama.  
11. Kate is not a dancer. If Kate is a ballet star, then Kate is a dancer. Thus, Kate is not a ballet 
star. 
12. If *, then $. $. Thus, *.  
13. Not -WWW. If 3456, then WWW. Thus, not -3456.  
14. If A, then B. If C, then D. A or C. Thus, B or D.  
15. If Alice is a sun -lover, then Alice is a nudist. Thus, since Alice is not a sun -lover, Alice is not 
a nudist.  
 
Answers:  
1. Modus Ponens  
2. Affirming the Consequent  
3. Denying the Antecedent  
4. Something else (this valid pattern is called Disjunctive Syllogism)  
5. Modus Tollens  
6. Modus Ponens  
7. Affirming the Consequent  
8. Denying the Antecedent  
9. Affirming the Consequent  
10. Something else (this valid pattern is called Hypothetical Syllogism ) 
11. Modus Tollens  
12. Affirming the Consequent  
13. Modus Tollens  
14. Something else (this valid pattern is called Constructive Dilemma)  
15. Denying the Antecedent  
 
Informal Fallacies  
 
Informal fallacies are inductive arguments that are commonly thought t o be strong when they are 
actually weak. That is, they are weak inductive arguments that fool a lot of people. There are 
47 
 dozens that have been analyzed and named over the centuries. Multiple websites list and discuss 
many (do a word search for “informa l fallacies” and set aside multiple weeks to read them all). 
We’ll select a few that show up often, especially in discussions ranging from thoughtful 
philosophy to really, really inept talk radio from both sides  of the dial.  
 
Many informal fallacies have Latin  names that are now known internationally. It should be no 
surprise that ancient Greek philosophers used Greek, and classical Indian philosophers used 
Sanskrit to name many of these same fallacies. When most English -speakers inside and outside 
philosophy u se the Latin name, we’ll use it here, too. If most English -speakers refer to the 
fallacy by a common English name, we’ll use the English. This is just an introduction; a full 
study of informal fallacies can take weeks and gallons of good Northwest microbre w. 
 
Students should be able to recognize an informal fallacy when it’s before them, and be able to 
explain why it’s a weak argument (i.e., why the premises do not make it likely that the 
conclusion is true). One potential complexity is that in many cases i n the so -called “real world” a 
weak argument may be guilty of more than one informal fallacy. No problem! The argument is 
thus bad for more than one reason. For our purposes, in this text we’ll attempt to look at 
examples that most clearly illustrate one i nformal fallacy. Class discussions and your instructor 
can help sort out the arguments that seem to be guilty of more than one logical infraction.  
 
With no particular order in mind, we’ll split 20 informal fallacies into four groups (for ease of 
study):  
 
Appeal to Pity  
Appeal to the People  
Ad Hominem  
 abusive  
 tu quoque  
 circumstantial  
Accident  
Straw Man  
 
Red Herring  
Appeal to Ignorance  
Weak Authority  
Genetic Fallacy  
Hasty Generalization  
 
False Cause  
 post hoc ergo propter hoc  
 non causa pro causa  
 oversimp lification  
Slippery Slope  
Weak Analogy  
Begging the Question  
48 
 False Dichotomy  
 
Is-Ought Fallacy  
Equivocation  
Amphiboly  
Composition  
Division  
 
Appeal to Pity  
 
Appeal to Pity occurs when someone argues that his or her woeful, pitiable condition justifies 
accept ance of  some conclusion, when that woeful, pitiable condition is irrelevant to the 
conclusion. All teachers know this to be a favorite fallacy of many students. For example,  
 
Student to philosophy teacher: “I know that the essay was due yesterday and that it was supposed 
to be on India’s classical logic system [i.e., Nyāya ], but I think you should accept this late paper I 
wrote on Ernest Hem ingway’s The Old Man and the Sea . My mom and dad are fighting, my dog 
is sick, and because I got a D on my Algebra tes t I’m really depressed  right now.”  
 
All of these semi -tragic events in this student’s life may very well merit sympathy from the 
teacher and anyone else within earshot, but the circumstances are logically irrelevant to whether 
the teacher should make speci al arrangements to accept a late essay on a topic far removed from 
the assignment.  
 
Other examples:  
 
“Chief architect and project manager Bob Shine should not be held responsible for the 
engineering flaws causing the recent Floating Bridge collapse. He’s g ot a lot of problems right 
now. His wife Sunny rides nude in Seattle’s annual World Naked Bike Ride, his kids are all 
vegetarian activists , and he lost every game in a recent Bellevue Chess Club tournament. We 
can’t throw more misery his way!”  
 
“The U.S. s hould allow my mother to acquire citizenship in this country. She was so poor in 
Mexico, and her illegal border crossing into the U.S. was very, very dangerous. And she now has 
four children to feed. Surely the U.S. should ignore immigration laws that appl ied to her.”  
 
Of course, if the appeal to the pitiable situation is relevant to the conclusion, then we don’t have 
a fallacy. For instance,  
 
“I’ve been out of work for eight weeks due to a work -related injury, and I’ve been looking 
steadily for a new job a ll the while. My wife and three kids are now hungry, we have no money 
left, and we have no family at hand willing to help us out. Thus we merit consideration for 
assistance from your well -funded Food for the Needy foundation.”  
 
Logicians need to be a bit c old-hearted, but not all the time.  
49 
  
Appeal to the People  
 
If I argue that you should believe X and use as my reason your (logically irrelevant) desire  to be 
associated with a  portion of society, I am probably guilty of the Appeal to the People fallacy. For  
instance, I might reason that wearing N ike T-Shirts will make you look like Michael Jordan or 
Tiger Woods, thus you should buy N ike T-shirts. Or I might argue that everyone  who is cool at 
school wears Ray -Ban sunglasses, and you want to look cool, don’t y ou? I can appeal to your 
desire to be cool, sexy, fit, young, rich, smart, or any other demographic of society, and if I make 
that appeal to demonstrate that you ought to believe X, then unless that desire is relevantly 
related to X, it’s a fallacious appe al. 
 
A broader instance of Appeal to the People is to argue that since all (or most) people believe, 
say, or do X, we should thereby agree that we should believe, say, or do X. But, just because the 
majority of Americans at one time thought slavery was mor ally permissible, does not in itself 
give any good reason to believe that slavery was —even back then —morally permissible. What 
all (or the majority) of the people believe, say, or do does not by itself show that we should 
follow suit. Independent reasoning  is needed to get to that conclusion with any degree of logic.  
 
Additional examples  of Appeal to the People include:  
 
“Tecate is the best selling beer in Mexico. Thus you should drink Tecate!”  
 
Melodramatic teenage daughter to mother: “But moooom, all my friends are like dating biker 
gangs these days. I should be able to, also, you know !” 
 
“Our present cultural norms dictate that murder is morally wrong. Thus murder is morally wrong  
for us .” 
 
Ad Hominem  
 
Known almost universally as  Argumentum a d Hominem , Argument against the Person is one of 
the most common fallacies heard today. Instead of challenging a person’s conclusion or 
argument, the wielder of an Ad Hominem  (Latin: “against the man”) chooses to attack 
irrelevantly the other’s character traits, lack o f consistency, motives, or situation. Logicians often 
name three fairly distinct kinds of Ad Hominem arguments: abusive, tu quoque , and 
circumstantial.  
 
Ad Hominem  abusive occurs when the fallacious arguer ignores another’s position, argument, or 
conclusio n and makes an irrelevant personal attack on the other’s character traits. For instance:  
 
“Senator Knight  says we should raise tax revenue for higher education. But Knight  has been 
making sexual advances towards Bob Shine’s wife, she’s been known to kick her dog, and she 
smokes at least two packs of cigarettes a day. We can thus safely reject Knight’s  position on 
taxes and education.”  
50 
  
Timber company advocate before a public hearing on increasing wilderness roadless areas in a 
forest: “These young people ca lling for increasing the  wilderness area are a bunch of long -
haired, maggot -infested, environmental whackos. Thus no one should listen to their arguments 
on wilderness areas.”  
 
Ad Hominem  tu quoque (Latin: “you also”) occurs when the fallacious arguer poin ts out the other 
person’s inconsistency in hol ding her position, and concludes that the inconsistency alone 
warrants everyone’s rejection of her position or argument. The problem here is that being 
inconsistent does not mean that your argued position is in  any way mistaken or shaky. 
Inconsistent people can be correct, and they can reason well. They may be making some kind of 
mistake in not having two of their beliefs match up, or in having a lifestyle not match up with 
what they claim all others should be d oing, but that alone says nothing about whether their stated 
position s are true or false, or argued for well or not.  
 
Examples:  
 
Patient to doctor: “You tell me that I should lose weight and exercise more. But you’re easily 20 
pounds too heavy. Therefore I  am justified in reject ing your claim that I am overweight and need 
to exercise more.”  
 
Timber company advocate continuing his attack on pro -wilderness activists: “These people 
calling for an expansion of wilderness out of love of Nature are inconsistent. They wear leather 
shoes! And some of them eat meat! And they all drove cars guzzling fossil fuels to this meeting 
today! With such inconsistency, their position r egarding this tract of land is surely without 
merit.”  
 
“Conservative talk show host Rush Limba ugh rails against drug addicts and government 
assistance programs for them. But he was hooked on  the pain reliever  Vicodin! How 
inconsistent! We can thus reject everything Limbaugh has to say about drug addiction and tax -
supported recovery measures.”  
 
“Pastor Smith has routinely referred to homosexuality as a sin. But we just found out that he has 
for months been having gay sex at the local city park. His inconsistency is appalling! We can 
thus reject all of his claims against homosexuality.”  
 
Ad Hominem circumstantial occurs when a fallacious arguer points to a vested interest another 
might have in people agreeing with his or her position, and concluding on that basis that we 
reject that person’s position or argument.  Imagine that State Senator Sunny Shine  wants the 
Justice Committee she chairs to approve a bill allowing people to sunbathe nude in their 
backyards. Senator Ima Dresser, an opponent to Shine and her position, stands up and says, “You 
just want that bill passed so you can sunbathe starkers in y our own backyard. You have a 
personal interest in seeing this bill passed. On that basis, we should all vote against it.” In this 
case Dresser is guilty of Ad Hominem  circumstantial because Shine’s position might be well -
51 
 argued and stand up to the light of  reason, regardless of whether Shine stands to gain anything 
from it personally or not.  
 
Additional examples of  Ad Hominem circumstantial include:  
 
Timber company advocate challenging yet again some pro -wilderness activists: “We need not 
pay attention to t he arguments of these wilderness advocates; they just want the land preserved 
for their own selfish recreational use: backpacking, snowshoeing, and Lord knows what else!”  
 
Anti-development activist writing to the editor of a newspaper: “We can reject devel oper Juan 
Murphy’s claim that the city will be benefitted by his new condominium development. He stands 
to make tens of thousands of dollars over the course of ten years on this project. It thus can’t 
possibly be good for our city!”  
 
Accident  
 
People are guilty of Accident when they appeal to a generally accepted rule and misapply it in a 
specific situation for which that the rule was never designed or intended. For instance, we agree 
that it is generally wrong to steal. But if I see a ban k robbery taking place and I notice  the get -
away car idling on the street, I’d be arguing fallaciously if I reasoned as follows: “It’s wrong to 
steal, thus it’s wrong for me to take the car keys out of the robbers’ get -away car to prevent their 
escape.”  
 
The name “Accident ” refers to a non -essential (what philosophers refer to as an “accidental”)  
feature of a  general rule misapplied fallaciously. It’s not the mere taking of the keys that’s wrong 
above; it would have been the wrongful taking, and in this case the taking is j ustified and not 
wrongful.  
 
Other examples of Accident include:  
 
It’s wrong to stick people with knives. Thus it’s wrong for that surgeon to stick a scalpel into her 
patient to remove his ruptured appendix.  
 
We should not speed in cars on city streets. Thu s I should not break the speed limit at 2:00 a.m. 
on this deserted street to get my bleeding friend to the Hospital’s Emergency Room.  
 
The fallacy of Accident is often an important and debated issue in courts. If a billboard sign 
company wishes to place a large, garish billboard in your residential neighborhood, you and your 
neighbors will likely cry, “No way! It would be an eyesore!” The billboard company may go to 
court and argue that it has a constitutiona l right to free speech, and it  wish es to exercise  that right 
in your neighborhood. The court will have to decide if the billboard company is guilty of 
Accide nt; you, of course, believe it is; the company , of course, will argue it is not. Ideally a 
rational, informed judgment will prevail.  
 
Straw Man  
52 
  
How  many times have you been listening to talk radio (ideally, not too many), and the host 
misinterprets what his opponent says, or restates his opponent’s argument so that it sounds like 
moronic mush…and then begins to pound away at the apparent stupidity of  his opponent’s 
position. If you are on your intellectual toes, you are shouting into the radio saying, “That’s not 
what the other guy is claiming! You’re misrepresenting his position!” Ever been there? You were 
listening  to an example of the Straw Man (aka “Paper Tiger”) fallacy. 
 
A Straw Man fallacy occurs when person A holds a position (or offers an argument), and person 
B misinterprets that position, attacks that weaker misinterpreted version, and shows to all who 
will listen that that version is bad an d should be rejected. But B has done nothing to show A’s 
actual position is bad; all B has done is trash a weak version of A’s position. If we —the 
listeners —are not careful, we’ll be suckered into believing that B just refuted A’s position.  
 
A weak version  of any position is easy to refute, as a straw man or paper tiger is easy to burn and 
be rid of. Let’s not let logically dishonest people fool us. If someone wishes to show that 
someone else’s argument or position is weak, let’s make sure the first person is giving a fair and 
accurate presentation of the other’s real position, and not attacking a ridiculous version that’s 
easy to spoof.  
 
Here are three e xamples of intellectually blinkered reasoning of the Straw Man variety:  
 
An animal rights group argues th at cosmetic companies should use fewer animals in their 
cosmetic tests. A cosmetic company advocate responds fallaciously: “These pro -animal people 
are wrong and should be ignored. Why? They would have advances in science stop in its tracks. 
They think all  animals should be preserved, and that all scientists and product testing should 
never use animals. But if we do that, we’ll never get cures for cancer or diabetes or other tragic 
diseases. That’s just crazy!”  
 
“Senator Billy Barker argues that we should c onsider federal background checks for anyone 
wishing to purchase automatic weapons. But denying gun ownership to American citizens 
is…well... un-American ... and against the Constitution! We should thus oppose Barker’s federal 
policy.”  
 
Pastor Bustle argues that our state is far too permissive in it acceptance of nudity. He challenges 
Senator Sunny Shine’s proposal to allow homeowners to enjoy their backyards nude when they 
make a reasonable effort to make their yards private and out of public view. “Shine an d her nudie 
friends,” he argues, “would have us put up with seeing their immodest bodies on every street 
corner, in every restaurant, and along every grocery store produce aisle. This is decadence of the 
most offensive kind! We must give an emphatic ‘No!’ to Senator Shine’s proposal.”  
 
**Practice Problems: Informal Fallacies  
Are the following fallacious lines of reasoning best understood as examples of Appeal to Pity, 
Appeal to the People, Ad Hominem , Accident, or Straw Man?  
 
53 
 1. We should not run with kniv es in our hands. So even though your friend is entangled in a rope 
tied to a heavy rock pulling him over a cliff edge, you should not run to him with a knife to cut 
the rope.  
2. Driver to traffic cop: “Man, has my day ever been bad. I spilled coffee in my keyboard at 
work, my girlfriend found out I’m married, and my stocks are continuing to take a nosedive. 
With all of this going on, you thereby shouldn’t give me a speeding ticket for going 50 mph in a 
25 mph zone.  
3. Teenager to teen friend: “My parents sa y I need to be home by 11:00 tonight. That’s so 
unfairly random! They don’t want me to have any fun or ever meet anyone. They want to control 
every aspect of my life! Since that’s clearly unjust, I need not take seriously their curfew.  
4. Senator Sunny Shi ne argued for her bill allowing backyard nudity by saying, “Benjamin 
Franklin, John Quincy Adams, Walt Whitman, Norman Rockwell, and other famous American 
figures sunbathed or skinny -dipped nude regularly. Backyard nudity is American as apple pie. If 
you l ove your country, you should support my bill!”  
5. Architect Bob Shine gave his friends his reasons for reluctantly supporting his wife’s backyard 
nudity bill. But others argued, “Oh, you’re married to her so it’s in your best interest to have her 
be happy.  Thus we can reject your arguments for the bill’s endorsement.”  
6. College student Stu tells his friend that she needs to study to pass her Sociology  test. She 
responds, “Stu, I’ve never seen you study beyond reading the required text. You are hardly one 
to talk. I can thus discount your claim about the need to study for my Sociology  test.”  
7. “Wheaties: The breakfast of champions!”  
8. Nervous student to himself: “It’s always good to study before an important math test. So, even 
though i t’s late the night b efore the test, and I hav en’t slept for 48 hours , I should force myself to 
study the rest of the night!”  
9. Professor Barnes teaches Latin American History. But he never dresses well, needs a haircut, 
and has bad breath. I guess we can ignore what he has t o say about Latin American history.  
10. Professor James says we st udents should spend less time with  our phones and video games 
and spend more time traveling, reading, and talking to a larger variety of people. James 
obviously hates technology and would ha ve us go back to the Stone Age, rubbing sticks together 
to light fire s and to send smoke signals. What nonsense. We can thus reject his claims about 
broadening our activities.  
 
Answers:  
1. Accident     6. Ad Hominem (tu quoque ) 
2. Appeal to Pity    7. Appeal  to the People  
3. Straw Man     8. Accident  
4. Appeal to the People   9. Ad Hominem (abusive)  
5. Ad Hominem  (circumstantial)  10. Straw Man  
 
Red Herring  
 
How many times have you heard an interview between a reporter and a politician in which the 
reporter asks  a potentially embarrassing question pointing out a fault with the politician, but the 
latter subtly changes the subject and concludes that everyone should think he’s the coolest thing 
since sliced bread? Far too often. We’re i n the world of the Red Herrin g fallacy here. Red 
54 
 Herring occurs when someone subtly changes the subject and draws a conclusion that unaware 
listeners take to be regarding the original issue. For instance:  
 
A pulp mill is said to be dumping large amounts of pollutants into a local rive r, making it unsafe 
to swim or fish downstream. A reporter asks the mill manager about this, and the managers says, 
“Well, you know, our mill employs dozens of local men and women, and we’ve been donating to 
the high school football team every year. The ci ty taxes we pay support the police and fire 
departments in our small town. I’d say that we’re an asset to this community!”  
 
The mill may be doing all these grand things, and it may even —overall —be an asset to the 
community, but the spokesman is avoiding th e issue of whether the mill is polluting the river and 
in that manner harming the community. He changes the subject slightly (to do so too bluntly 
would make his evasion of the issue too openly apparent; he thus cannot effectively change the 
subject to the  strength of the Seattle Mariners’ outfield), talks about the mill’s strengths 
regarding community effect, and concludes that the mill should be applauded for the good work 
it does locally. Rarely d o reporters have the nerve to call such people on their ev asion of the 
question, but we listeners are often frustrated when politicians, business leaders, and other 
officials side step an issue, focus on their strengths, and conclude that everything is okay.  
 
The phrase “Red Herring” refers to the old British prac tice of training hounds to chase foxes for 
horse -mounted fox hunts. Trainers would guide dogs to follow the scent of foxes, and not go off 
track looking for something else. The trainers would sometimes take a smelly herring, wipe it 
across the fox’s track,  throw it into the bushes, and see if the dog would stick with the fox scent 
or get sidetracked and follow the tantalizing aroma of rotting fish. Going after the herring 
indicated a poor hunter, as today it indicates a poor thinker.  
 
Note that the fallacio us Red Herring arguer is not restating  in a weak manner  the original 
argument or position as he would if engaged in a Straw Man fallacy. Here, the arguer is changing 
the subject subtly, and offering a conclusion he hopes listeners will take to pertain to t he original 
issue. Here’s another example of Red Herring doing exactly this:  
 
An opposing senator argues: “Senator Shine would have us support backyard nekid gardening. 
But what this is really about is the moral decay of our society. People are not willing  to take 
responsibility for acting in an upright manner anymore. Just last week we heard of an entire high 
school football team getting together to rob a liquor store. A woman was assaulted on our streets 
last night! Kids are writing graffiti all over the walls of our town hall. We’ve thus got to say 
‘No!’ to Senator Shine’s proposal.”  
 
Appeal to Ignorance  
 
The fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance occurs when someone argues that because we do not know 
that X is true, that gives us reason to believe that X is fals e, or, because we do not know that Z is 
false, that gives us reason to believe that Z is true. For instance:  
 
No one has proved that astrology does not work. Therefore it does work!  
55 
  
A logical, convincing argument for God’s existence has yet to be provided . Therefore, God does 
not exist.  
 
No person or culture has ever come up with a clear objective, universal basis for morality. Thus 
there is no objective, universal basis for morality.  
 
Pretty clearly, just because no one has proved one side of the issue, i t does not follow that the 
other side is true. It could be that the issue is difficult and challenging, and that good arguments 
are still to come. Scientists still do not know why massive objects fall in normal gravitational 
fields. We can see that such ob jects do fall, and we ca n measure accurately the rate at  which they 
fall, but as to why…? Still, that does not mean that there is no answer; it could be we just have 
not discovered it yet. Also, an answer may indeed have been found, but for some reason mos t of 
us have rejected it or forgotten it.  
 
All that said, if we don’t find an answer and we would have if there was one, then we can safely 
conclude something. For instance, if a team of expert mountain climbers spend three years 
scouring the top 500 feet of Mt. Rainier looking for a mature palm tree, and they don’t find one, 
the team would be justified in saying that there is no such tree there. This is because if the tree 
was there, they’d have surely found it. This may not be the case with inquiries into  the existence 
of God or an objective basis for morality. Such issues are far more complex than looking for a 
palm tree on a single mountain top.  
 
Weak Authority  
 
Appeals to authority may be strong or weak, depending on how authoritative the authority is o n 
the issue in question. Consider the following argument:  
 
All astronomers say that Jupiter and Saturn are the largest planets in our solar system. Thus 
Jupiter and Saturn are the largest planets in our solar system.  
 
This is a strong argument because ast ronomers are authoritative on the size of our solar system’s 
planets. They might be mistake n, but this is an inductive argument, and the arguer is not 
intending to prove deductively anything here. Consider, though, the following argument:  
 
My four -year-old niece Jessica [who has never studied astronomy and does little but burp and 
watch cartoons] says that Jupiter is a large planet. Thus Jupiter is a large planet.  
 
This is what we’ll call a n example of  Weak Authority because Jessica —at least at this young 
stage of her life —is no authority on astronomy or the size of planets. She is correct in her claim, 
but it would be a weak inference on our part to believe this claim about Jupiter simply because 
she said it was so.  
 
Authorities can be individual persons, c ommittees, universities, books, encyclopedias, online 
sources, signs, plaques, or any other generally reliable source. Of course, thoughtful people 
56 
 might disagree on the authoritativeness of some figures. One might believe a man really knows 
his stuff and is authoritative, while another might have good reason to doubt the man’s 
knowledge in the area. Induction often requires some discussion or debate, so we won’t let those 
possibilities bother us.  
 
Also, some kinds of claims just don’t lend themselves well  to appeals to authority. For instance, 
moral claims or claims about God’s existence are generally weak if merely made by an appeal to 
authority. “Presidents George Washington and Ronald Reagan said that God exists. Thus God 
exists.” These two guys may hav e been smart, and they may have been correct about God’s 
existence, but the mere fact that they say that God exists really can giv e us no reason to believe 
it. If either of them has a good argument for God’s existence, that argument may give us good 
reason  for becoming believers, but then we’d no longer be appealing to authority, but to that 
argument.  
 
One more point. Sometimes someone might be an authority on one issue, but not authoritative on 
what he or she is talking about today. For example, if I appea l to Stephen Hawking (a famous 
and reputable astro physicist) on how the U.S. should respond to the Israel/Palestine conflict, I’d 
likely be making a Weak Authority argument, because Hawking is not an authority on 
international politics.  
 
Examples of clear ly strong  appeals to authority include:  
 
The o fficial sign outside our school  says “Bellevue College.” Thus this school must be Bellevue 
College.  
 
Stanford University’s philosophy web site says that Plato was Greek. Thus Plato was probably 
Greek.  
 
The title  of your  textbook purchased at the college bookstore is Introduction to Biology . Thus 
your text book is likely about biology.  
 
Zoology teachers have told me that mice are mammals. Hence, I am justified in believing that 
mice are mammals.  
 
Clear examples of Weak Authority include:  
 
The marking pen scrawl on the men’s restroom wall says, “Buffus rules!” Therefore, Buffus 
must rule.  
 
Famous actress and singer Barbara Streisand says that the nuclear power plant would be unsafe 
for our community. Therefore we sho uld not allow such a plant to be built here.  
 
Edgar Rice Burroughs’ fictional novel, Tarzan of the Apes , says that Tarzan lives in Africa some 
time and in England other times. Thus if I went to Africa, I might be able to meet Tarzan!  
 
57 
 My mother told me lon g ago that Jesus is the son of God. Thus Jesus is the son of God.  
 
The majority of our culture believes and says that sexual assault is morally wrong. Thus, sexual 
assault is morally wrong.  
 
Genetic Fallacy  
 
How someone comes to acquire a belief is distinc t from whether that belief is true or not. Surely 
a little boy can acquire a true belief in an odd, unreliable way. For instance, he might come to 
believe that a man walked on the Moon by reading of such an occurrence in a Sci -Fi comic book. 
If he were to come running in excitement to us saying, “A man walked on the Moon!” and we 
replied that we should reject his belief because he acquired it in a manner that is not usually 
trustworthy for belief -acquisition, we’d be guilty of a weak line of reasoning known  as the 
Genetic Fallacy.  
 
The Genetic Fallacy gets its name from the same root word we find in genesis , referring to the 
beginning. We commit this fallacy when we argue that because the origin of the belief —that is, 
how the belief came to be held —is questi onable, the belief itself is questionable. But this does 
not follow. We can acquire true beliefs in bizarre ways, and we can acquire false beliefs in 
reliable ways (e.g., when little kids come to believe that Santa Clause exists because all the 
adults in t heir lives say so).  
 
Examples of the Genetic Fallacy include:  
 
Confused Freudian to believer: “You came to believe in God due to your desire for a father 
figure. Thus God does not exist.”  
 
Confused behaviorist to believer: “You came to believe in God due t o cultural conditioning. 
Thus God does not exist.”  
 
Confused theist to atheist friend: “You believe God does not exist because you suffered so much 
in your life. Thus God does exist.”  
 
Obviously the Genetic Fallacy shows up in less theological discussions,  too: 
 
Five-year-old Juan Garcia came to believe that two plus three equals five from his student friend 
in kindergarten. But kindergarten kids are hardly authorities on math. So it is false that two plus 
three equals five.  
 
Five-year-old Juan Garcia came to believe that two plus three equals six from his student friend 
in kindergarten. But kindergarten kids are hardly authorities on math. So it is false that two plus 
three equals six.  
 
Friend to friend: You believe that Mary loves you because Alice told yo u so. But Alice is a 
lunatic who is always gossiping. Alice is not trustworthy. Thus Mary does not love you.  
58 
  
Our moral beliefs (e.g., that stealing is wrong) were acquired subjectively through cultural 
conditioning. If we had different conditioning (e.g.,  different teachers, parents, pastors, friends), 
we’d have different moral beliefs. Thus there is nothing objectively true about moral beliefs.  
 
Hasty Generalization  
 
Hasty Generalization occurs when the arguer appeals to what’s known about a portion of a group 
and then makes a weak inference to that claim being true of the whole group. Clear examples are 
weak polls. For example:  
 
Professor Tran asked three students in her graduate class on American Literature if they like to 
read books. All three said they  did. Tran said that she thereby could conclude that all the students 
at her university like to read books.  
 
This generalization from three students to the entire school student population is weak for at least 
two reasons: the sample is woefully small, and  the sample was not neutral (American Literature 
graduate students would obviously like to read books, and probably like it more than most others 
on campus).  
 
Other examples of Hasty Generalization:  
 
Confused professor to friend: “College students today ar e all slackers. I know this is true because 
last week two of them showed up for my class late.”  
 
Radio talk show host: “Driving to work I saw three young people writing graffiti on public walls. 
The youth today are a bunch of thugs.”  
 
Bob selected at rando m two cards from a large box containing hundreds of baseball cards. Both 
cards selected were of Seattle Mariners. Therefore every card in the box is probably of Seattle 
Mariners.  
 
I ordered two books from Amazon.com, and both arrived in damaged condition. I can only 
conclude that Amazon.com always sends damaged materials.  
 
**Practice Problems: Informal Fallacies  
Are the following fallacious lines of reasoning best understood as examples of  Red Herring, 
Appeal to Ignorance, Weak Authority, Genetic Fallacy, o r Hasty Generalization?  
 
1. No arguments or evidence has proven alchemy to be true. Thus the claims of alchemy are 
bogus.  
2. I heard a guest philosopher try to answer some questions on the radio yesterday. Boy, did he 
sound like an idiot. He kept mumbling,  saying “ah…ah…ah,” and had a hard time answering any 
question directly. All philosophers must be morons.  
59 
 3. Alvin Plantinga is a respected American philosopher of the last three decades. He says the 
Mariners will win the next World Series. Thus I’m puttin g my money on the Mariners!  
4. Senator Sunny Shine in response to a critic of her backyard nudity bill: “Senator Smith, you 
oppose my bill because —as you say —you don’t want to force neighbors to see ugly bodies. But 
ugliness is a complicated aesthetic conc ept. Many art theorists have labored unsuccessfully to 
define ‘beauty’ and ‘ugliness.’ Philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein thought the task hopeless. Thus 
people should support my bill.”  
5. A Roman Catholic priest, speaking publicly from his pulpit, asked five  of his parishioners if 
they believed in God. All five said yes. The priest responded, “See, this country is full of 
believers!”  
6. Most people come to believe that George Washington was the first U.S. president due to the 
cultural conditioning of the educ ational system. Thus there is no objective truth to whether or not 
George Washington was the first U.S. president.  
7. Many dieticians think we should eat chemical -free foods. But chemicals are vitally important 
to our lives. Without them, we’d not have the  plastics we all rely on today, nor would we have 
access to strong, light -weight materials for cars or planes. These dieticians are just foolish.  
8. Raw vegans have come up with no good reason to believe that cooked food is harmful to us. 
Thus cooked food is perfectly safe for human consumption.  
9. Michelle Obama (the U.S. president’s wife) says American children should eat less fat. 
Because she says this, we can conclude that American children should eat less fat.  
10. Friend to friend: “You heard that Pres ident Barack Obama is a Muslim on a talk radio show. 
But those radio show hosts are nuts. Thus Obama is not a Muslim.”  
 
Answers:  
1. Appeal to Ignorance    6. Genetic Fallacy  
2. Hasty Generalization    7. Red Herring  
3. Weak Authority     8. Appeal to Ignoranc e 
4. Red Herring      9. Weak Authority  
5. Hasty Generalization    10. Genetic Fallacy  
 
False Cause  
 
A False Cause fallacy occurs when someone argues from cause to effect or effect to cause, but 
does so when there is no good reason to believe that such a cau sal relationship may be expected. 
For instance:  
 
As Joe drives by a partially destroyed building and sees flames jutting out of its windows and 
rescue vehicles all around, he concludes that Martians must have just attacked.  
 
Joe’s inference is weak, as the re is no good reason to conclude a Martian attack is a likely cause 
of the damage to the building. Far more sensible causes could be inferred.  
 
Logicians sometimes like to distinguish at least three kinds of False Cause. One, receiving the 
fancy Latin enum eration of non causa pro causa (“not the cause for the cause”) is the most 
60 
 general, positing something as a cause of something else when the first thing is not actually the 
second thing’s cause. Examples include:  
 
All great historians for the Roman Empire  read Latin. Thus, if Sara  learns Latin, she’ll be a great 
historian of the Roman Empire.  
 
In any major city, when more ice cream is eaten, the crime rate goes up. We must therefore ban 
all eating of ice cream.  
 
Wherever there are more churches, there is m ore crime. Thus we must get rid of churches.  
 
Whenever I’ve gotten an A on a college test, I was wearing clothes. Clothing must thus heighten 
intellectual abilities.  
 
A more specific form of False Cause is called post hoc ergo propter hoc (“after this the refore 
because of this”). Sometimes people refer to it as simply a post hoc fallacy. These examples of 
False Cause make the point that merely because action B occurred immediately after action A, it 
follows that A caused B. But this line of reasoning is su rely weak, because it often happens that 
one thing follows another, when there is no direct causal connection between the two. The sun 
rises every day prior to setting, but it would be odd to say that the morning’s sunrise causes the 
evening’s sunset. Exam ples of False Cause post hoc fallacies include:  
 
Senator Garcia spoke at our university today at noon. Immediately afterwards a tornado struck 
our city. For the love of God, we must never let Garcia speak here again!  
 
I broke a mirror yesterday. That’s why  I got in a car accident today.  
 
While riding on a train through the mountains I was eating my lunch. All was going well until I 
bit into my bologna sandwich. All of a sudden I could not see anything. Immediately after 
finishing the sandwich I could see ag ain. Thus, eating bologna sandwiches causes blindness!  
 
Sammy Slugger hit two home runs over the past two days, and right before those two at -bats he 
rubbed his lucky rabbit’s foot. He should thus rub the heck out of that thing throughout every 
game!  
 
A third distinct variety of False Cause is sometimes called False Cause oversimplification. Here, 
the causal connection appealed to obtains (that is, it accurately reflects how the world works), 
but it’s not the whole story. Other causes ignored in the argumen t were at play. For instance, 
President Ronald Reagan’s foreign policy was probably a cause —in part —of the fall of the 
Soviet Union’s political system. But to say that Re agan caused the fall of the Soviet Union is to 
oversimplify the situation. The USSR’s economic situation, internal political dissent, their 
foreign policy, and other factors contributed together to usher in the dramatic change. Other 
examples include:  
 
61 
 Bob finally got an A in a college course. The textbook Bob used was written by Hora ce Kli ne. 
We can conclude that  Kline’s writing produces student success.  
 
The relationship between big businesses and local communities is declining these days. 
Obviously the CEOs are not doing their jobs.  
 
The Backyard Nudist Association has acquired large cont ributions from both Democrats and 
Republicans in our state. Thanks must therefore go to the BNA’s chair, Senator Sunny Shine, as 
she must be a great fundraiser.  
 
Slippery Slope  
 
Slippery Slope arguments can be strong or weak, but they all share a pattern i n common. They’re 
actually a form of False Cause, but have their own unique characteristics. A Slippery Slope line 
of reasoning argues that A will cause B, B will then cause C, C will then cause D, and D will 
then cause E. But we don’t want E! So we should  not even allow ourselves to get started down 
the slope; we should thus reject A. This argument can be strong if we have good reason to affirm 
each causal link (e.g., between A and B). But if we have good reason to reject one or more of the 
causal links, t hen just because we allow A to take place, it does not mean that E will occur.  
 
Here is a pretty good causal chain argument:  
 
If straight -A student Beatrice stops studying for her physics class, she’ll not ace her next Physics 
test. And if she does not ace  her next Physics test, she’ll not get an A in the class. And if she 
does not get an A in Physics, she’ll no longer be a straight -A student. And if she is not a straight -
A student, she’ll not get the $1000 her aunt promised her if she did finish with strai ght As. 
Beatrice wants that $1000; so Beatrice should continue studying for her Physics test.  
 
What do you think of the following causal chain argument? Is it a truly slippery slope or a 
fallacious Slippery Slope?  
 
If we allow the government to register p rivate ownership of automatic weapons, next they’ll 
want to register all private ownership of hand guns. And if they register private ownership of all 
handguns, next they’ll ban all private ownership of automatic weapons. And once they do that, 
they’ll nex t ban private ownership of all guns. Canada will view this as a window of opportunity 
and attack the USA. We don’t want that. (Think of the horror!) So we must not allow the 
government to register ownership of automatic weapons.  
 
Is there a break in the lo gic links anywhere? If so, it’s a fallacy; if not, be very, very afraid, eh. 
Here’s an example of a clear Slippery Slope fallacy:  
 
Teacher to school administrator: “We can’t let students choose which classes they take, for 
they’ll next want to choose how m any they need to graduate. After that, they’ll not be satisfied 
until they teach the classes themselves. Then they’ll want to take charge of the buildings and sell 
62 
 them to China. Chinese business groups would take over our country and we’d all have to be 
Communist. If you value democracy, we must say ‘No!’ to these students!”  
 
Weak Analogy  
 
Analogical arguments compare two things or two groups of things. Such arguments point out 
some relevant similarities between the two things, and conclude that they are s o relevantly 
similar that what is true of one is probably true of the other. Arguments from analogy can be 
incredibly strong, and as we’ll see later in this course, we bet our lives on them every day. Still, 
some arguments from analogy are seriously weak, and we can call these Weak Analogy fallacies.  
 
One basic problem with many weak analogies is that there is a significant and relevant difference 
between the two things being compared. For instance:  
 
Both Albert Einstein and Aristotle were males, very smart , highly respected, and wrote books. 
Einstein believed that nothing travels faster than the speed of light. Thus Aristotle probably 
believed this, too.  
 
The problem here is that Aristotle, being a 4th century BC Greek philosopher, did not have the 
physics or math background to understand things like the theory of special relativity.  
 
Other examples:  
 
Ima Dresser and Sunny Shine are both women, married, Washington State senators, Democrats, 
and chairs of congressional committees. Ima Dresser thinks anyone co nvicted for a third time of 
skinny -dipping within view of anyone other than one’s spouse should receive a $10,000 fine and 
life in prison [Dresser was born in Montana where that’s the current law]. Thus Sunny Shine 
likely agrees with Dresser on this respon se to such behavior.  
 
Pastor Bustle of the Central Baptist Church believes in the existence of God, thinks associating 
with fellow believers is important to him, and votes regularly. The same can be said for Rabbi 
Maimonides. Maimonides celebrates Hanukah with his friends each year. Therefore, Bustle 
likely does, too.  
 
I’ve gone out to dinner four times this week. I’ve eaten at the Carnivore Carnival BBQ Pit, the 
Hungry Man Burger Barn, the Tuesday night all -you-can-eat sausage feed at Mel’s Meat House, 
and the Sizzlin’ Steak Shack. I loved each meaty meal. Thus I’ll probably also love the dinner 
tonight at a new raw vegan restaurant in Seattle called Thrive.  
 
There are a number of ways analogies can go bad, and we’ll look at them in more detail later.  
 
For now, let’s consider two more examples of Weak Analogy:  
 
Tim dated Mary once and had a great time. Thus Tim expects to have a great time when he dates 
her again tonight. [This is not the strongest argument, because Tim has only one experience to 
63 
 work from.  If he had dated Mary multiple times before and enjoyed each date, he’d have a better 
argument.]  
 
Sue took three classes from Professor King and liked them all. Sue has signed up for another 
King class next quarter, and concludes that on the basis of her p ast experience in King classes, 
this one will be the best experience of her entire life. [Here Sue’s conclusion is far too specific. 
Liking  her previous three classes with King gives her little reason to think the next one will be 
the highlight of her life .] 
 
Begging the Question  
 
Begging the Question is far too common even among sharp thinkers. It’s one the brightest 
philosopher still can struggle to avoid. Begging the Question (we’ll consider this the same as 
Circular Reasoning) occurs when someone assume s the truth of the conclusion when offering a 
premise for that conclusion. The premise is needed to support the conclusion (as is proper and 
expected), but also the conclusion is needed to support the premise (hence the “circle”).  
 
An obvious example of Be gging the Question is this: “The Book is the word of God. Why should 
we believe this? I’ll tell you! The Book says it’s the word of God, and God would not lie.” 
Clearly one cannot assume that God wrote (or inspired the writing of) The Book to show that 
God wrote The Book. Believers can argue for the divine authorship of a holy work without 
arguing in a circle, however. One might argue for a text this way: “The Book contains language 
so beautiful that no human could have written it. Thus The Book has a divin e source.” This may 
not be the greatest argument, but at least it’s not assuming from the git -go that God wrote The 
Book.  
 
Other examples include:  
 
Aristotle was a more intelligent philosopher than Epicurus. We know this to be true because 
insightful philo sophers say so. And we know them to be insightful philosophers because they are 
the kind of people who recognize that Aristotle was a more intelligent philosopher than Epicurus.  
 
Euthanasia is morally wrong, because it’s a sin.  
 
Murder is wrong; thus abort ion is wrong.  
 
Opponent to Senator Shine’s backyard nudity bill: “Backyard nudity is wrong because…well, we 
know it is.”  
 
All that exists is material in nature and determined by causal laws. Thus there is no free will.  
 
Jim: “We know mass creates gravity b ecause dense planets have more gravity.” Margo: “How do 
we know which planets are more dense?” Jim: “They have more gravity.”  
 
64 
 Some people use the phrase “Begging the Question” in an additional sense. In a conversation 
someone might say something questiona ble that prompts a question. The listener might 
confusedly say, “That begs the question, ‘What about such -and-such?’” Saying something 
questionable that prompts a question or a demand for independent support is not the same as 
assuming information to get t o that same information. If someone offers a premise for a 
conclusion, and that premise needs support itself, one can certainly demand the arguer supply 
that support. But this is different from the fallacy of Begging the Question.  
 
False Dichotomy  
 
A Disju nctive Syllogism is a two -premise argument of the form  
 
P or Q  
P is false.  
Thus, Q  
 
This is a deductive line of reasoning, and perfectly valid. However, if someone offers an “either -
or” statement as one of the premises, and neither disjunct (the two state ments to either side of the 
word “or”) is true, then ruling out one in the other premise does not actually give good reason to 
say the other is true. Since this problem is a matter of content —and of understanding that the 
disjunction is too limiting to be true—we are in the realm of informal fallacies.  
 
Parents of teenage children are the world’s experts at False Dichotomy. The se nearing maturity  
often come to the ir parents  with the following kinds of “either -or” lines of illogic:  
 
Daughter to mother; “Mooo oom, either you let me date th e platoon based at Fort Lewis , or I will 
surely die. And you don’t want me to die, right?”  
 
Son to father: “Dad, either you buy me these $200 running shoes or my life will be ruined!”  
 
Parents will adroitly point out to their adoring children that a third option lies squarely in their 
future. Or how about the beleaguered guys facing an onslaught of Valentine’s Day ads?  
 
“Either you buy your sweetie a really, really expensive piece of diamond jewelry, or she’ll think 
you loathe  her.”  
 
“Buy X, Y, and Z, or women won’t think you’re hot!” [This has the acrid aftertaste of Appeal to 
the People, too.]  
 
Guys are not the only ones facing this nonsense:  
 
“Either you have the figure of a super model, or no guy will ever like you. And sur ely you don’t 
want that. So buy the latest version of Super -Beauty Body -Shaping Cream!”  
 
65 
 And let’s not think too long and hard about what crazy claims talk show hosts and politicians too 
often give us:  
 
“Either you vote Republican or government will take a way all your guns. For the safety of your 
family and our country, vote Republican!”  
 
“Either you vote Democrat or the government will take away your rights to privacy. For your 
own well -being, vote Democrat!”  
 
**Practice Problems: Informal Fallacies  
Are th e following fallacious lines of reasoning best understood as examples of  False Cause, 
Slippery Slope, Weak Analogy, Begging the Question, or False Dichotomy?  
 
1. Senator Billy Barker advocates allowing terminally ill patients to receive voluntary passive 
euthanasia. But if we allow that, patients will next be asking for voluntary active euthanasia, and 
then it will be non -voluntary passive euthanasia, then non -voluntary active euthanasia. My God, 
we could then see involuntary euthanasia, first of the mental ly ill, then for those with colds, then 
for those who wear too much Spandex in public. We’d lose half of Los Angeles! We can’t allow 
that, so we must disagree with Barker on this.  
2. Surely you want to send the very best card to your grandmother for her bi rthday. And it’s 
either Hallmark brand cards or…well…garbage. Thus you should send her a Hallmark card.  
3. We try on shoes before we buy them. We give cars a test drive before committing to a 
purchase. Thus we should have sex with our boy - or girlfriend be fore we get married.  
4. Free market capitalism is an ideal system, because having the liberty to buy and sell anything 
you want is better than any other economic approach.  
5. I had a coffee right before my chemistry test yesterday, and I bombed the test. I ’m never 
drinking coffee again!  
6. Either you’ll marry me this week or you don’t love me! Surely you love me; so it’s settled, 
you marry me this week.  
7. Each time I arrived with flowers two hours late for my dates with Susan, she was upset with 
me. Susan must really dislike flowers.  
8. Melanie and Trud y have the same parents and the same  upbringing. Both go to Bellevue 
College, and both like computer science and sports. Melanie wants to go out with me. Thus 
probably Trudy does, too.  
9. My daughter scored a  goal in her soccer game yesterday. I can conclude that extra exercise I 
encouraged her to do paid off.  
10. Reading racy novels leads to looking at porn. Looking at porn leads to viewing other people 
as mere objects. After a while, that will cause you to a ssault someone. But we don’t want 
assaults in our society. So we should ban racy novels.  
 
Answers:  
1. Slippery Slope     6. False Dichotomy  
2. False Dichotomy     7. False Cause ( non causa pro causa ) 
3. Weak Analogy     8. Weak Analogy  
4. Begging the Question    9. False Cause (oversimplification)  
66 
 5. False Cause ( post hoc ergo propter hoc ) 10. Slippery Slope  
 
Is-Ought Fallacy  
 
The line of reasoning we will examine here probably merits as much discussion and debate as 
any of our other informal fallacies. There a re some thoughtful philosophers who will want to 
defend the so -called move from “is” to “ought, or “ought” to “is.” Still, we’re going to call such 
an inference a fallacy. Surely it will be so in many cases. So what is the Is -Ought Fallacy?  
 
An “Is” statem ent is descriptive ; it describes how the world actually is. The statement may be 
false (as it fails to correspond to reality), but it still claims to be accurately describing the way 
things are. Examples of “is” or descriptive statements include:  
 
The Empi re State Building is in New York City.  
George Carlin is not president of the USA.  
2 + 2 = 4  
A blue pen is colored.  
Triangles have four sides.  
The USA has 145 states.  
Most people believe that 2+3=5.  
It is a cultural norm (or custom, more, folkway) in the US A not to murder people.  
It is a cultural norm in Culture X for husbands to assault their wives.  
 
An “Ought” statement is prescriptive ; it prescribes how things ought to be (whether or not they 
happen to be that way now, and whether the prescriptive claim i s true or false, or whether 
everyone agrees to it or not). They are thus claims about the moral nature of something or other. 
For instance:  
 
We ought not to murder people.  
Sexual assault is wrong.  
Truth -telling is usually the right thing to do.  
The USA oug ht not to have engaged in slavery.  
We should not be sexist.  
We should be sexist.  
People should worship God on the Sabbath.  
People should believe only what they are rationally justified in believing.  
 
The Is -Ought Fallacy occurs when someone argues from a m erely descriptive claim (or set of 
merely descriptive claims) to a prescriptive claim, or vice versa. The idea behind the problem is 
that just because something is (or is not) the case, does not mean that it ought to be (or not be) 
the case. Moreover, just  because something ought to be (or not be) the case does not mean that it 
is (or is not) the case.  
 
For instance, we ought not to murder, but that does not mean that murder never takes place. 
Also, we ought to tell the truth, but that does not mean that no  one ever lies. On the flip side, just 
67 
 because robberies take place does not mean that there should be (or should not be) such actions. 
Just because no one in our culture is doing X, does not mean that X is wrong (or right). And the 
norm for our culture be ing Y gives us no logical reason by itself to believe that we ought to do 
Y. 
 
Here are some examples of what we here refer to as the Is -Ought Fallacy:  
 
The lifestyle and public demands of religious and political leaders ought to be consistent [a 
prescripti ve claim]. Thus the lifestyle and public demands of religious and political leaders are 
perfectly consistent [a descriptive claim].  
 
In the early 1800s, slavery was perceived by the majority in the USA as morally permissible [a 
descriptive claim]. Thus sla very was not wrong in the USA in the early 1800s [a prescriptive 
claim].  
 
Racis t segregations policies were  a norm for the southern USA in the 1960s [a descriptive 
claim]. Thus people like Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malc olm X were wrong to fight racist 
segregation policies in the southern  USA in the 1960s [a prescriptive claim].  
 
Female genital mutilation (a common practice in some cultures) goes against the cultural norms 
of the USA [a descriptive claim]. Thus female genital mutilation is wrong in the USA  [a 
prescriptive claim].  
 
Various rich, thoughtful theories of ethics will claim that the cosmos h as an eternal order. Hindus 
have called this order Ṛta; the Chinese have referred to it as the Dao; Natural Law Theorists 
from the West often refer to it as Eternal Law. The cosmic order offers something like a 
blueprint for the universe, and if things par ticipate in it according to its plan for them (i.e., as 
humans, animals, plants, rocks, or whatever they are), the universe will flow in an orderly, ideal 
manner. This all sounds rather descriptive to some critics, who then say that no prescriptive 
claim c an logically follow merely from it. Thus, they say, it is an example of the Is -Ought 
Fallacy to argue (as Martin Luther King, Jr. seems to argue in his “Letter from Birmingham 
Jail”) that because within Eternal Law humans have the role of X, humans are thu s morally 
obliged to do X. Hm. Let the philosophizing begin!  
 
There is one last point to make regarding the Is -Ought Fallacy: it often is found in arguments 
guilty of other fallacies. Appeal to Pity, for instance, often argues from the descriptive claim th at 
I am in a pitiable situation, and concludes prescriptively that someone ought to do such -and-such 
for me. Appeals to the People fallacies also often begin from a descriptive claim about the 
sexiness of X, or the athleticism of Y, and concludes prescript ively that we ought thereby to 
embrace X, or Y. It is common that bad arguments fit more than one fallacious pattern. T hat 
makes it challenging to come up with practice examples that have only one clear answer, but it’s 
worth our while to understand the di stinction between these fallacies nonetheless.  
 
Equivocation  
 
68 
 To equivocate is to use a word in two different ways and with two different meanings, while 
allowing others to think you are meaning only one thing. The fallacy of Equivocation occurs 
when someo ne begins an argument meaning one thing by a word, but switches meanings (tacitly 
or explicitly) later in the argument, and the conclusion follows only because of that illicit switch 
in meanings. A simple illustration is this:  
 
Rivers have banks. But I hea rd that Bob keeps his cash in a bank. Thus Bob must have some 
pretty soggy cash.  
 
A dumb argument, yes. The word “bank” refers to the muddy sides of rivers in the first premise, 
but to financial institutions in the second. The conclusion is playing off the  ridiculous double 
meaning of the word “bank” her e. Look for a double meaning of a word impacting the 
conclusion  in these additional examples . 
 
My wife hit me over the head with a bat. Thus, someone should call Animal Control. [“Bat” can 
refer to an elonga ted tool used in baseball or to a flying mammal. The conclusion is working off 
the bizarre secondary meaning of the word.]  
 
Nothing is better than having good friends and bodily health. And a stale bologna sandwich is 
better than nothing. So, a bologna san dwich is better than having good friends and bodily health.  
 
Tennis star Serena Williams seems often to get an ace against her opponents. Thus she would do 
very well at draw poker.  
 
A turtle is an animal. Thus, a fast turtle is a fast animal. [The word “fa st” is being used in two 
different senses here: in terms of turtle speed and in terms of animal speed; they are not the same 
thing.]  
 
Architect Bob Shine recalling his recent problems over the Floating Bridge collapse: “Boy, that 
bridge has taken its toll on me.” A befuddled friend concluded that Shine is mistaken: “But you 
don’t live anywhere near that bridge, so you  never had to pay the road toll  to cross it.”  
 
Senator Ima Dresser to committee: “I wish to speak confidently and openly, to stand naked 
befor e you.” Immediate fallacious response from Senator Sunny Shine: “Finally, she agrees with 
me!”  
 
Student to student friend: “Professor Storey’s logic lecture today was so exciting that we sat 
glued to our seats.” Intellectually challenged friend’s response:  “You thus must have had 
difficulty standing up. How’d you get up off that sticky chair?”  
 
Amphiboly  
 
The fallacy known as Amphiboly is akin to Equivocation, but whereas Equivocation plays off an 
ambiguity of a single word or term, Amphiboly plays off a gr ammatical ambiguity. Some 
sentences can be phrased poorly so that two distinct meanings might be understood. If an arguer 
69 
 draws an inference from a secondary, clearly ridiculous meaning or interpretation, that arguer is 
guilty of Amphiboly. For instance:  
 
Senator Ima Dresser was so distraught over losing the Justice Committee vote to Senator Shine 
yesterday that she was seen crying and wiping her eyes on the State Capitol lawn. We can 
conclude that Dresser must have grass stains on her face.  
 
Botany student  to class -skipping fellow student: “Our professor spoke about trees in our 
classroom today.” Fellow student: “Wow! You must have moved outside, because I don’t recall 
any trees in our classroom.”  
 
Court reporter to intellectually blinkered friend: “After sentencing the criminals and addressing 
the members of the jury, the judge sent them off to jail.” Friend: “Oh dear. I had no idea that 
people had to go to jail for serving as jurors.”  
 
Groucho Marx: “One morning I shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he go t into my pajamas 
I’ll never know.”  
 
Suspect to police detective: “You guys suspect several people of robbing the store. Thus, I can’t 
be under suspicion, since I was alone the afternoon  of the robbery.”  
 
Sign on café window: “Eat here and you’ll never eat  anywhere else again!” Rationally confused 
passerby: “Boy! They must serve some dangerously bad food there!”  
 
Composition  
 
This and the final informal fallacy are the flip side of each other. In Composition, the arguer 
contends that merely because somethin g is true of each of the parts of a thing, that character trait 
is true of the whole, as well. But that does not always follow; it’s not a reliable inference. For 
instance:  
 
Each brick in this wall is well made. Thus this wall as a whole is well made.  
 
Each sentence in Sarah’s English essay is well formed. Thus her essay is well formed.  
 
I like fresh tuna, cheese, chocolate, spaghetti sauce, black licorice, and hot bread. Thus I’d like a 
licorice/chocolate/tuna pizza.  
 
I can lift every individual part of my  car. Thus I can lift my entire car.  
 
Each part of Rene Descartes’s metaphysics is internally consistent. Thus his metaphysics as a 
whole is internally consistent.  
 
Each player on the NBA All -Star team is excellent at basketball. Thus the NBA All -Star team  is 
excellent at basketball.  
70 
  
Division  
 
If Composition is “Parts  Whole,” then Division is “Whole  Parts.” Division occurs when 
someone argues that merely because something is true of a thing as a whole, that trait is also true 
of each part of that whole . As with Composition, this is a weak line of reasoning. For example:  
 
The ACME Company did quite well this past year. They made higher profits than usual, and the 
local community loves them. Thus each employee of ACME is doing well at his or her job.  
 
The USA is not in favor of Americans visiting Cuba. Thus Maria Drake, an American tour agent 
for U.S. travelers, is not in favor of Americans visiting Cuba.  
 
My Subaru did not cost very much! Thus I can expect if the headlight ever breaks, it will be 
inexpens ive to replace it.  
 
Water quenches thirst. Therefore, since hydrogen is part of what makes up water, it quenches 
thirst, too.  
 
Stanford University is an excellent academic environment. Thus, Stanford freshman Bill Dense 
is an excellent student.  
 
I love Mex ican mole negro  sauce. It contains among other things dried chilies, nuts, fruit, 
chicken broth, onions, garlic, and chocolate. Thus I’d love to eat a bowl of dried chilies.  
 
**Practice Problems: Informal Fallacies  
Are the following fallacious lines of rea soning best understood as examples of  the Is -Ought 
Fallacy, Equivocation, Amphiboly, Composition, or Division?  
 
1. Senator Billy Barker is a handsome man. Thus Barker’s left elbow is handsome.  
2. Wife feeling physically uncomfortable while driving her car with her husband: “I think I have 
gas.” Unthinking husband: “Good! We can thus avoid stopping at the service station and we’ll 
make it to the movie on time.”  
3. Senator Sunny Shine went out into her backyard to garden in her tennis shoes. Those must 
theref ore be extra large tennis shoes to hold a garden.  
4. Senator Ima Dresser: “The majority of this fine city is opposed to naked backyard gardening. 
Thus such activity is morally wrong!”  
5. Each of Sunny Shine’s backyard garden crops taste good: her beets, be ans, squash, kale, and 
spinach. Thus if she mixed them all together they’d taste good, too.  
6. Pastor Bustle: “It’s clear that adultery is wrong, which by itself convinces me that no one in 
this congregation is be engaging in such immorality.”  
7. Bellevue citizens contributed $100,000 to charity for the homeless last night. Rabbi 
Maimonides is a Bellevue citizen. Thus Maimonides contributed $100,000 to the homeless 
charity last night.  
71 
 8. Teenage daughter to friend: “My mom censors my phone calls by telling me not to take calls 
from that really cool biker gang.” Confused friend in reply: “That’s horrible! Your mom is thus 
breaking the law, as censorship is against the First Amendment.”  
9. Each grain of sand in this sandcastle can withstand great pressure and maintain its shape. 
Thus, this sandcastle can withstand great pressure and retain its shape.  
10. Olde r woman to friend:  “As a girl, my grandfather told me stories about living in the Wild 
West.” Befuddled friend in response,” I can conclude that his accou nts were not nearly as wild as 
his story about his sex change.”  
 
Answers:  
1. Division     6. Is-Ought Fallacy  
2. Equivocation    7. Division  
3. Amphiboly     8. Equivocation  
4. Is-Ought Fallacy    9. Composition  
5. Composition    10. Amphiboly  
 
**Practice Probl ems: Formal and Informal Fallacies  
For each fallacious line of reasoning below, determine which of the two formal fallacies or 20 
informal fallacies it most clearly illustrates.  
 
1. W e should re-elect  Senator Garcia. After living through a tornado, he’s fe eling kind of bad 
recently. He needs encouragement.  
2. Pastor Bustle has argued against the new proposal demanding that churches pay property tax. 
But we can ignore his arguments because he’s a pastor and passage of the bill would cost his 
church money.  
3. The school’s PTA has argued that our students are not reading at acceptable levels due to our 
teachers using progressive classroom methods. But we can reject the PTA’s position. Students 
spend a lot of time playing video games and sending text messages on  their phones. Technology 
seems to be taking over everyone’s attention these days. Every bill coming out of Congress 
seems to support one new -fangled gizmo or another.  We really should get back to the good old 
days where people talked to each other each e vening face -to-face.  
4. Democracy is the best form of government. From this we can conclude that the rule of 
centralized authority is not ideal.  
5. The claims of alchemy must be true, for scientists like Francis Bacon believed in it.  
6. The Seattle Times  told today of a two Albanians who rescued a drowning child from a raging 
river. Albanians must be a courageous people.  
7. Mid -level management has requested a water cooler in their lounge. But if we give them that, 
they’ll next want full kitchen access. The n it will be their own gym, then an entire building 
devoted to them. We can’t afford to purchase a new building, so we must not give them that 
water cooler.  
8. Kale is a leafy green that grows easily in Washington. Poison hemlock is a leaf green that 
grows  easily in Washington. Kale is nutritious for humans. Thus poison hemlock is likely 
nutritious for humans, too.  
9. No one has understood the complete nature of God. Thus no one can understand God’s 
complete nature.  
72 
 10. The immorality of a society brings on  political collapse. Thus, since the U.S. is acting 
immorally these days, our country will soon undergo collapse.  
11. An elephant is an animal. Hence, a small elephant is a small animal.  
12. Either our country gets on its knees and asks God for forgiveness , or our political and social 
systems will collapse. Surely we don’t want collapse! Thus get on your knees and pray!  
13. My friend says that I should vote Democrat in the next election. But she’s a granola -eating 
nudist, and an environmental extremist. Thu s her arguments for voting for Democrats are faulty.  
14. We should do unto others as we would have them do unto us. Since, as a masochist, I like 
experiencing pain, I ought to inflict pain on others.  
15. Senator Smith’s assistant says she found a picture o f Senator Shine in Smith’s desk drawer. 
But Shine is a grown woman. How on Earth did Shine fit in that drawer?  
16. “I saw an old John Wayne Western movie last night. The Wayne character rode a horse quite 
well. There apparently were quite a few people who could ride horses in the Wild West.” 
Friend’s response: “That’s a ridiculous way to come to believe something. Movies are often 
fictional. Thus your belief is false.”  
17. The factory manager charges me with stealing tools from work. But I’ve seen him stea l office 
supplies week after week. Thus his claims about me may be rejected.  
18. Culture Y believes that sexual activity among unmarried people is morally okay. Thus such 
activity is morally okay in that culture.  
19. Everyone cool at school is wearing ri pped jeans. Thus,  I too should wear ripped jeans.  
20. Every academic department at this college works efficiently as individual units. Thus all the 
departments work efficiently together.  
21. Believer to illogical atheist friend: “The Bible says that the Jews  lived in captivity under 
Egyptian rule.” Illogical friend’s response: “But the Bible is a highly complex book, with a great 
deal of metaphor. It’s not a reliable way to gain knowledge about history. If you believe the Jews 
lived in Egypt due to reading it  in the Bible, then it must be false that the Jews lived in Egypt.”  
22. Senator Ima Dresser has stated that people should never be without clothes in public view. 
Apparently she can’t stand the sight of the human body, and would throw into jail any doctors  
who examine their patients, and would label as sex offenders any actors who performed nude on 
stage. That’s absurd! We can thus reject Dresser’s position.  
23. Fellow student Roger argued to the teacher that the class would learn the material better if we 
all were given essay assignments instead of research projects. But Roger is an English major who 
knows how to write well and easily. Essays would be a piece of cake for him! Thus Roger’s 
arguments are bad.  
24. If Senator Smith votes for Senator Barker’s gu n control bill, Barker votes for Smith’s 
education tax bill. But Smith will not vote for Barker’s gun control bill. So, Barker will not vote 
for Smith’s education tax bill.  
25. Budweiser is the king of beers! Thus, you should drink Bud!  
26. I got food pois oning at Joe’s Café last week. I’m eating at a restaurant tonight, so I better  
prepare  for stomach cramps.  
27. Tax dodger to IRS: “I know I declared multiple business expenses that never took place, but 
if I had to pay my full tax bill, I’d not have enough  money left over to take my three kids and 
their grandmother to Disneyland for vacation. And the kids and Granny are so looking forward to 
that. They cry each night thinking they won’t be able to go. Thus the IRS should waive all 
penalties for my recent ta x fraud.  
73 
 28. Dieticians tell us that if we eat too much fast food, we’ll get sick. Let’s not eat too much fast 
food, so we’ll thereby never get sick!  
29. Terminally ill patients should have the right to doctor -assisted euthanasia, because many of 
them cann ot commit suicide on their own.  
30. Either you join the U.S. Chess Federation, or you don’t like to play chess. But you love to 
play chess, don’t you? The choice is obvious.  
31. Different cultures have different beliefs about the morality of gay marriage. Therefore, there 
is no objectively correct answer to whether or not cultures should allow gay marriage.  
32. People are dr iving like crazy on the highway  tonight. Thus  there must be a full moon.  
33. Logic tutor: “All three students who met with me today wer e confused about validity. 
Therefore, everyone at Bellevue College is confused about validity.  
34. If Al likes apples, then Barry likes bananas. Thus, since Barry likes bananas, Al likes apples.  
35. The Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan says we ought to rej ect Senator Barker’s affirmative 
action programs. On the basis of the Wizard’s understanding on such matters, we should reject 
Barker’s proposals.  
36. Cows are similar to lions. Both have hair, have four legs, have a tail, and give birth to live 
young. Thu s, because cows are vegetarians, lions are, too.  
37. It seems like every time I step into my bathtub, the phone rings immediately afterwards. I’m 
kind of lonely tonight, so I think I’ll take a bath.  
38. Bob says that he’s never mistaken and that we should always believe him. Well, I guess 
that’s that. Since he’s never mistaken, we can trust what he says here.  
39. We should never lie. Thus when your friend asks what you think of her particularly ugly 
tattoo, you should state your true opinion openly and clea rly. 
40. Google is an efficient company. Thus Bert, one of Google’s marketing managers, is an 
efficient Google employee.  
 
Answers:  
1. Appeal to Pity (& Is -Ought F.)   21. Genetic Fallacy  
2. Ad Hominem (circumstantial)   22. Straw Man  
3. Red Herring      23. Ad Hominem (circumstantial)  
4. Begging the Question    24. Denying the Antecedent  
5. Weak Authority     25. Appeal to the People  (& Is -Ought F.)  
6. Hasty Generalization    26. Weak Analogy  
7. Slippery Slope     27. Appeal to Pity  (& Is -Ought F.)  
8. Weak Analogy     28. Denying the Antecedent  
9. Appeal to Ignorance    29. Begging the Question  (& Is -Ought F.)  
10. False Cause ( non causa pro causa ) 30. False Dichotomy  
11. Equivocation     31. Is -Ought Fallacy  
12. False Dichotomy     32. False Cause ( non causa pro causa ) 
13. Ad Hominem (abusive)    33. Hasty Generalization  
14. Accident      34. Affirming the Consequent  
15. Amphiboly     35. Weak Authority  
16. Genetic Fallacy     36. Weak Analogy  
17. Ad Hominem  (tu quoque )   37. False Cause (post hoc ergo propter hoc)  
18. Is -Ought Fallacy     38. Begging the Question  
74 
 19. Appeal to the People  (& Is -Ought F.)  39. Accident  
20. Composition     40. Division  
75 
  
Chapter 8: Arguments from Analogy  
 
We use  and hear  arguments from analogy every day. They can be so trustworthy that we’ll bet 
our lives on them. Or, they can be horribly, unredeemably bad.  
 
Arguments from analogy compare two things, or two groups of things. After noting that the two 
things are relevantly similar, we conclude that what is known to be true of one is probably true o f 
the other. For instance, let’s imagine that I have three modern jazz CDs featuring Miles Davis: 
Cookin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , Relaxin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , and Workin’ with 
the Miles  Davis Quintet . I see that there’s another Miles Davis CD available: Steamin’ with the 
Miles  Davis Quintet . The three I presently own all feature Miles Davis as lead musician playing 
trumpet. The fourth CD also features Miles Davis as lead musician playing trumpet. I like the 
music on the three CDs I have, so I conclude that I’ll probably like the music on Steamin’ with 
the Miles Davis Quintet , too.  
 
Every time you buy a CD or download music from your favorite musician, you are arguing from 
analogy. Every time you go to your favorite restaurant, or buy your fav orite candy bar, or buy a 
book by your favorite author, or date your favorite girl - or boy -friend, you are arguing from 
analogy. Are you guaranteed that tonight’s date will go as well as the others? No, but this is 
inductive reasoning, and deductive certai nty will never be quite within reach. Still, you pony up 
some money, put your ego on the line, and go on that date expecting to have about as good a 
time as you did previously.  
 
In fact, every time you get in your car and drive to the store, you bet your l ife on an argument 
from analogy. Think about it: you could be struck by a falling meteorite (or a drunk driver) and 
perish. Yet you get in your car and serenely drive into town. Why? Well, you’ve driven to the 
store a thousand times before and have never d ied in the process. This trip is relevantly similar 
(i.e., analogous) to the hundreds of  others, so you conclude that you will probably not perish on 
this trip, too.  Quod erat demonstrandum ! 
 
Arguments from analogy will have a distinct structure:  
 
Entity A  has characteristics W, X, Y, and Z.  
Entity B has characteristics W, X, and Y.  
Thus, B probably has Z, too.  
 
Entity A is the primary analogate (aka the primary analogue ). Entity B is the secondary 
analogate (aka the secondary analogue ). It’s about the prim ary analogate that we know the most; 
it’s to the secondary analogate that the conclusion is directed. In our Miles Davis example above, 
the three CDs I already own are the primary analogates. The CD I’m thinking of buying is the 
secondary analogate. W, X, and Y are the similarities known to be shared by the primary and 
secondary analogates. For instance, the group of three CDs I have are each similar to the one I’m 
thinking of buying, as both the primary and secondary analogates contain modern jazz music, t he 
lead musician is Miles Davis, and Davis is playing trumpet. Z, in our example, is my liking the 
76 
 music on the first three CDs. I’m thereby inferring that  I’ll probably like the music on  the 
secondary analogate.  
 
The argument is clearly inductive, as my l iking the first three CDs in no way can guarantee that 
I’ll like the fourth. Davis may play poorly on this fourth CD, or he may end  up playing a 
radically different style of jazz, or no jazz at all. He may play nothing but monochromatic 
Buddhist chants on a harmonica! Still, given the information we have, it looks like a pretty 
strong argument. I really should buy that fourth CD.  
 
In assess ing arguments from analogy, five  principles should be considered. For any given 
argument, it may be the case that it lo oks strong given consideration of one or two principles, but 
shamefully weak considering one or more others. Assessing arguments from analogy is more a 
matter of informed consideration than in cranking out a black -and-white answer. There is also 
room for d ebate and for one party in the assessment process to know more than the others, and 
thus to have more relevant knowledge at hand to make a more informed judgment of the 
argument’s merits. Knowledge is often power in assessing inductive arguments.  
 
Five principles meriting close consideration in assessing arguments from analogy include : 
 
 1. Number and relevance of similarities  
 2. Number of primary analogates  
 3. Diversity  among  primary analogates  
 4. Number , degree,  and nature  of differences  
 5. Specificit y of conclusion  to premises  
 
Number and Relevance of Similarities  
 
All else being equal  (ceteris paribus ), the more relevant similarities there are between the 
primary and secondary analogates, the stronger the argument is. The similarities need to be 
relevant to the conclusion, though. Let’s take the Miles Davis argument above as our base 
example. We can add a couple irrelevant similarities and we end up inferring  the conclusion with 
no more confidence. For instance:  
 
I have three modern jazz CDs featuring  Miles Davis: Cookin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , 
Relaxin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , and Workin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet . I see that 
there’s another Miles Davis CD available: Steamin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet . The three I 
presently own all f eature Miles Davis as lead musician playing trumpet. They also have a picture 
of a sailboat on the CD cover and the sailboat is painted red. The fourth CD also features Miles 
Davis as lead musician playing trumpet, and it has a picture of a red sailboat on  its cover, too. I 
like the music on the three CDs I have, so I conclude that I’ll probably like the music on 
Steamin’ with the Miles Davis Quintet , too.  
 
This revised argument is no stronger than the original one, because the added similarities 
(pictures of a sailboat that is red) are not relevant to my enjoyment of the music. Consider, 
however, if we left out the appeal to the red sailboat pictures and noted that John Coltrane played 
77 
 saxophone and Red Gardner played piano on my three CD s, and that all thr ee records were made 
on the same two weekends in the late 1950s, and all that is true also of Steamin’ with the Miles  
Davis Quintet . Now the argument is much stronger, as I have additional relevant reasons for 
thinking that my original three CDs are very m uch like the fourth one I’m thinking of buying. 
Any musician’s backup band will have a profound effect on the quality of music he or she 
produces, and Coltrane and Gardner are my favorite saxophone and piano players respectively. 
That the fourth record (no w a CD) was recorded at the same time as the three I presently have 
tells me that Davis will likely be playing the same style of jazz on Steamin’ with the Miles  Davis 
Quintet . 
 
Number of Primary Analogates  
 
All else being equal, the more primary analogates  there are, the stronger our argument from 
analogy. If I’ve eaten at Joe’s Café ten times and I’ve always liked the food, I have pretty good 
reason to think I’ll like the food if I go to Joe’s for dinner tonight. If I’ve eaten at Joe’s 20 times 
in the past  and always liked the food, my argument is stronger. If I’ve eaten there 100 times and 
always liked the food, I’d say that it’s almost (but not quite) guaranteed that I’ll like the food 
there tonight.  
 
We can change our original arguments to say I presentl y have ten (not merely three) CDs by 
Miles Davis, and I like them all. Thus I’ll like the next Miles Davis CD I buy. If that’s the only 
change to the original argument (i.e., all else is equal), I now have stronger reason to buy that 
new CD. If I presently  have over 40 Miles Davis CDs, and I like them all, then I’d have even 
stronger reason to believe I’d like that additional CD.  
 
Another potential concern related to this first principle is that the primary analogates might not 
all point to the conclusion. Assume, for example, that I have 40 Miles Davis CDs, and like 30 of 
them. This still gives me go od reason believe that I’ll like the next Miles Davis CD I buy, as I 
like most of those I presently own, but my new argument is not as strong as when I had 40 D avis 
CDs and I like d each of them.  So, the higher the percentage of primary analogates favorably 
pointing to the conclusion, the stronger the argument will be.  
 
Diversity among Primary Analogates  
 
All else being equal (which seems to be a catchphrase here) , the greater the diversity among the 
primary analogates, the stronger the argument is likely to be. If the primary analogates consist of 
only one kind of thing, and they are all pretty much the same, then that can tell you something 
about another thing (i .e., the secondary analogate) as long as it’s relevantly similar to the first 
group. But if the first group has a mix of character traits, that can strengthen the argument. For 
instance, consider once again our original Miles Davis CD argument. Let’s make one change: 
we’ll diversify the primary analogates (in ways that admittedly do not accurately represent 
Davis’s recordings from this period). They’ll continue to share the same characteristics with 
Steamin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , but we now also lea rn that one CD has Davis playing 
electric trumpet while he’s playing acoustic trumpet in the other two. In one CD he’s playing 
bebop, in the second he’s playing a cool style, and in the third he’s fusing jazz with rock. In one 
78 
 he has a full orchestra playi ng an opera with the band, in another he incorporates hip hop 
musicians , and in the third he includes classical music  from Spain . And I like each CD! I can 
now conclude with greater confidence than before that I’ll probably like a fourth Miles Davis 
CD, si nce it appears that I like his music no matter what he does.  
 
Number , Degree,  and Nature  of Differences  
 
Most of us have heard the criticism, “Oh, that’s just comparing apples to oranges.” The critic is 
here claiming that someone else —who has just offered an argument from analogy —is comparing 
two relevantly different things, claiming that they are similar, and that since something is true of 
one thing, it is thereby likely true of the other. But, our critic notes, the two analogates are quite 
different in r elevant ways. What’s true of one is not thereby likely to be true of the other.  
 
For instance, aspirin is a drug, and so is heroin. They are similar in that both cost money, and 
both are available in the USA. Thus —we might weakly argue —since aspirin is saf e for most 
people to take, so too is heroin. That’s a ridiculous inference because aspirin and heroin are 
relevantly different. One is a mild pain reliever that has no serious side effects for most people, 
while heroin can cause serious harm if taken in to o large a quantity and it is highly addictive. 
The arguer here is indeed comparing “apples to oranges.”  
 
Often —all else being equal —the more relevant differences between the primary and secondary 
analogates, the weaker the argument. Consider again our orig inal Mile Davis argument. Let’s 
imagine, though, that we find out that for the CD I am thinking of buying ( Steamin’ with the 
Miles  Davis Quintet ) Davis decided to feature the didgeridoo and a set of gongs. The first three 
CDs I already have use no such ins truments, and are limited to the trumpet, saxophone, bass, 
piano, and drums one often finds in a mid -1950s modern jazz quintet. The change in musical 
instruments with Steamin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet  thus makes it relevantly different from 
the first t hree, and I no longer am as confident in my liking it as much as I like the ones I already 
have. I may like the fourth CD more , but that’s up for question. The emergence of that question 
is what makes the conclusion less likely, and thus the argument weake r. 
 
Of course, some differences are more relevant and critical to the conclusion than others, so the 
degree  of difference can play a role in determining how strong or weak an argument from 
analogy is. If the new information learned above was simply that th e band had played at night 
during the recording of the first three CDs I own, but they played during mid -day for the 
recording of Steamin’ with the Miles  Davis Quintet , that difference is far less relevant that the 
change in musical instruments, so it woul d weaken the argument less. Still, the time of day jazz 
musicians play may impact their style or readiness to play well, so it might be relevant, and thus 
my conclusion is not quite as strong as it was in the original argument.  
 
Sometimes a difference can  strengthen an argument from analogy. Imagine that after presenting 
the original Davis argument, I find out that for the first three CDs the band did not care too much 
about the quality of the music (perhaps because they were fighting with the producer), b ut put all 
their effort into the fourth CD. This is likely a relevant difference, and in this case, it may give 
me stronger reason to believe the conclusion (i.e., that I’ll like the music on the fourth CD).  
79 
  
If you are hearing an argument from analogy, an d you get the sense that it’s weak, finding 
relevant differences (or “disanalogies”) is often the most straightforward way of showing the 
argument to be weak. It’s also the way that the befuddled person offering the weak argument will 
most readily understa nd. You will be showing that she is guilty of comparing “apples to 
oranges,” which is one way of being guilty of the Weak Analogy fallacy . 
 
Specificity of Conclusion to Premises  
 
It would be nice to have a more clearly informative name for this fifth princ iple, but “Specificity 
of Conclusion to Premises” may be the best we can do. The idea is this. Sometimes a set of 
premises will justify our concluding something similar about the secondary analogate, but we 
might —if we’re not careful —overstate the conclusi on. For instance, in our original Miles Davis 
argument from analogy, I liked  my three Davis CDs and conclude that I’ll probably like the 
fourth Davis CD. If, instead, we had concluded that I would love the fourth CD, the argument 
would be weaker. Merely li king three CDs does not give much reason to believe that I will love 
another. If we change the conclusion instead to “I will therefore find Steamin’ with the Miles  
Davis Quintet  to be my favorite CD of all time,” the argument is weaker still, as the conclu sion is 
getting harder and harder to hit; it’s become too specific given what the premises say.  
 
We could change the original argument and make it stronger by adjusting the conclusion so that 
it is “easier to hit,” that is, to make it less specific. We cou ld conclude, for instance, that “I will 
thus not be made ill by listening to the fourth CD.” Given that I like the first three, it’s highly 
improbably that I will be sickened by a fourth similar CD.  
 
We could also adjust the premises and achieve similar re sults. If we change the premises of the 
original argument to say that I love these three CDs, and conclude as originally that I will 
probably like the fourth one, the argument is stronger than the original. If, on the other hand, the 
original premises were  changed to say that the three CDs I now have do not make me sick, and 
leave the conclusion as originally stated, the argument is weaker, as the conclusion is now made 
more specific in relation to the premises.  
 
Argument Assessment  
 
Let’s now consider an a rgument from analogy, and see where its strengths and weaknesses (if 
any) lie. Consider the following argument:  
 
Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mahatma Gandhi were activists struggling for social chan ge. So too 
was Che Guevara. King and Gandhi encouraged non -violence. Thus, Guevara probably 
encouraged non -violence, too.  
 
Note that King and Gandhi are the primary analogates, and Guevara is the secondary analogate.  
Let’s consider each of the five principles and see what we wish to say about this argument.  
 
80 
 (1) The only similarities appealed to here are being an activist and struggling for social change. 
We may happen to know that all three men were active in the 20th century, but that similarity is 
not appealed to here, and if that were relevant, we might help the arguer by providing this added 
premise. But we’ll not consider it here. Noting that the King/Gandhi pair and Guevara are all 
men is probably an irrelevant similarity. Given that there are many activist ways of trying to 
achieve social change, that King  and Gandhi advocate d non-violence does not give us much 
reason to believe that Guevara did, too. We’d need to see some more relevant similarities to feel 
confident about this conclusion. The argument is looking fairly weak so far.  
 
(2) There are only two primary analogates (King and Gandhi). That’s not many, although that 
number might do if the argument meets the other demands of an argument from analogy well. 
The low number certainly is not helping the argument. It’s still looking weak!  
 
(3) Given that we  have only two primary analogates, it’s hard to have much diversity among 
them. Still, King is American; Gandhi is Indian. King fought against American racist segregation 
policies, while Gandhi fought against British control of India. King was active in th e 1960s, 
Gandhi in the 1920s -1940s. All else being equal, the amount of diversity is not bad, but this 
argument still looks weak. It’s not weak due to lack of diversity, which would be the case —to an 
extent —if we appealed to Fred Shu ttlesworth (a compatrio t of King’s in the non -violent fight 
against segregation) instead of Gandhi.  
 
(4) There are many irrelevant differences that are not worth bringing up: King was American, 
Gandhi was Indian, and Guevara was born an Argentinean; the King/Gandhi pair are best  known 
for their struggle in the USA and India respectively, while Guevara is best known for his struggle 
in Cuba. A relevant difference is that King and Gandhi were advancing social change under the 
influence  of the Christian and Jain ethic of non -violenc e, while Guevara was advancing social 
change under Marxist philosophy. Since Marxism makes far greater allowances for the use of 
violence in moving societies toward historical change, we have little reason to believe that 
because King and Gandhi advocated non-violence, that Guevara did, too. This argument is 
looking really weak now!  
 
(5) The conclusion is worded as a thoughtful person might expect. King and Gandhi are said to 
advocate non -violence, and so too is Guevara. That’s better than concluding that G uevara 
demanded non-violence. And it’s worse than concluding that Guevara didn’t mind non -violence. 
The claim of the conclusion in our original King/Gandhi/Guevara argument is appropriately 
specific given the premises. All else being equal, this argument w ould look okay on that score.  
 
So, what do we make of this argument? It’s clearly weak, as the similarities are few, the number 
of primary analogates are few and not very diverse, and there is at least one major relevant 
difference between the King/Gandhi pair and Guevara. Che Guevara may have been an advocate 
for peace and non -violent means (he was not), but this argument does little to support that 
position.  
 
**Practice Problems: Assessing Arguments from Analogy  
81 
 Consider the two arguments from analogy bel ow. Then examine the following individual 
changes to the argument. For each sequential change, determine if it makes the argument 
stronger (S), weaker (W), or leaves it unchanged (U). Then determine which of the five 
principles (as numbered above) you are most clearly considering in making that first 
determination (1 -5). For each change, assume that the changes preceding it still apply (unless the 
latest change changes that earlier change).  
 
I. Tiago has taken three classes at Bellevue College, and liked ea ch one of them. He just enrolled 
in Social Philosophy at Bellevue College, and expects that he will like it, too.  
 
1. The three classes Tiago has taken are Accounting, Calculus, and Statistics.  
2. The conclusion is changed to “he will love it.”  
3. All four  classes are taught by Professor Kim.  
4. The previous three classes were held in the evening when Tiago is at his best, while the fourth 
class will be held at 7:30 am.  
5. The first three classes had an average of 35 students in them, while the fourth class  will have 
32 students in it.  
6. We change the premises to say that the first three classes were the highpoint of Tiago’s life, up 
to then.  
7. Tiago has taken five classes at Bellevue College, the other two being Algebra and Symbolic 
Logic. All five classe s were high points in Tiago’s life.  
8. Those two additional classes were actually English 101 and Introduction to Philosophy.  
9. Tiago functions poorly in the evening, and excels in the morning.  
10. Tiago has a crush on Maria and has been trying to impress  her with his acad emic skills. She 
was in all five  of his previous classes, and she’s enrolled in his next class.  
11. Maria has just told Tiago that she thinks he’s a weirdo and has gotten a court injunction to 
keep him from speaking to her.  
12. Tiago love s to read and write essays, and has been taking the math -related classes at Bellevue 
College so far only because his father demanded that he become a mathematician. Since his 
father has recently run off to Bora -Bora with Maria, Tiago is now free to take wh at classes he 
likes.  
13. In Social Philosophy, Professor Kim will require students to read a newspaper editorial 
presenting a debate between Senators Sunny Shine and Ima Dresser.  
14. Pastor Bustle plans to work with Rabbi Maimonides to protest Professor Ki m’s use of the 
Shine -Dresser editorial in a publicly -funded college. They plan to alert the media regarding their 
protest on campus.  
15. Professor Kim has been playing tennis for the past ten years, and he plans to continue playing 
tennis for the indefinit e future.  
 
Answers:  
1. W 4 (There’s a huge difference between the math -related classes he’s taken and the Social 
Philosophy class he recently enrolled in.)  
2. W 5 (If he only liked  the previous classes, there’s no good reason given for him to love a 
fourth  class.)  
82 
 3. S 1 (All else being equal, the teacher adds a relevant similarity and makes the argument 
stronger than it was.)  
4. W 4 (The time of day is often quite relevant to whether a student will enjoy a class or not.)  
5. U 4 (It’s a difference, but it’s  so minor as to be irrelevant.)  
6. S 5 (The premises now make the conclusion less specific —and easier to “hit.”)  
7. S 2 (We now have five primary analogates instead of three; the argument is thus now a little 
stronger.)  
8. S 3 (We are now starting to get s ome diversity in the kind of classes Tiago took. They are no 
longer just symbolic or math -oriented.)  
9. S 5 (If Tiago did well in the evening, even though he’s a morning person, he should do even 
better in the next early -morning Social Philosophy class.)  
10. S 1 (Well, if Tiago has blood in his veins, this may very well be an additional relevant 
similarity.)  
11. W 4 ( ¡Que lastima ! This seems to be a relevant difference that may likely put a cramp in 
Tiago’s educational motivations or his ability to enjoy th e next class. We certainly have less 
reason to be confident in the conclusion than we did after the last change.)  
12. S 4 (The difference that before seemed to weaken the inference now appears to strengthen it. 
Tiago is finally getting to take another kind  of class he’s always liked.)  
13. U 4 (Unless all the other classes read a similar article —which is highly unlikely —this is a 
difference, but it does not appear to be relevant enough to noticeably change the likelihood of the 
conclusion being true or false .) 
14. W 4 (Again, we’ve got a difference, but this time it’s unclear if this will make Tiago’s next 
class more or less enjoyable for him. Since we don’t know if he’ll welcome or not the ruckus 
caused by the protest, we are thus less sure about the conclus ion. That new uncertainty on our 
part lets us know the argument is now a little weaker.)  
15. U 1 (It’s an additional similarity, but it’s probably irrelevant to the conclusion.)  
 
II. Mary is thinking of buying a car from Hal’s Used Cars. Her friend Tom bou ght a car from 
Hal’s, and it ran well for over two years. Mary concludes that if she buys a car from Hal’s Used 
Cars, that her car will also run well for at least two years.  
 
1. Mary has three other friends who purchased cars from Hal’s Used Cars, and thei r cars have 
run well for over two years.  
2. One of the friends bought a sedan; one bought a station wagon; the third bought an SUV; 
while Tom bought a hatchback.  
3. Mary’s four friends are avid amateur car mechanics, while Mary knows little about cars.  
4. Mary adjusts her conclusion to say merely that her new car will likely not break down within a 
month of purchase.  
5. Mary changes her conclusion again to say that her car will last her lifetime and will run better 
than any of her friends’ cars.  
6.  Mary no tices that her four friends bought their cars from Hal’s on sunny days, and she plans 
on buying hers from Hal’s on a sunny day, also.  
7. Mary notices that all the cars bought from Hal’s Used Cars by her four friends had been 
worked on by Mike, the experien ced chief mechanic at Hal’s. Mary’s car will be worked on by 
Mike, too.  
83 
 8. Mary finds out that her four friends regularly change their car oil , and she is determined to do 
so, too.  
9. Mary’s four friends live in Los Angeles, California, whereas she lives i n Hollywood, 
California.  
10. Unlike her friends, Mary plans to use her car in extensive off -road travel touring Baja 
California, Mexico.  
11. Mary is an exotic dancer, while her friends are all computer programmers.  
12. Mary plans to change the oil in her c ar every 2000 miles, while her friends did so only once 
per 50,000 miles.  
 
Answers:  
1. S2   5. W5   9. U1  
2. S3   6. U1   10. W4  
3. W4   7. S1   11. U4  
4. S5   8. S1   12. S4  
 
Arguments from Analogy and Moral Reasoning  
 
Given the current fad of moral relativism, i t sometimes comes a s a surprise to students and to  
many of their college instructors that we argue for moral claims all the time, and think we’re 
pretty good at it. When someone does us wrong, we immediately jump at the chance to explain 
to others why they  should believe we’ve been grievously wronged and that the scallywag who 
wronged us should suffer the woes of hellish perdition. For instance, if your normally beneficent 
logic teacher was to give an unanticipated 15 -page, in -class essay as your upcoming l ogic test, 
and required for the essay that it be written in Sanskrit as a proof for Heisenberg’s Uncertainty 
Principle, you’d likely struggle and get an F. Upon receiving that grade and hearing from your 
teacher that you should buck up and recognize that “ Life throws you a curve every now and 
then,” you’d probably walk over to the college D ean of Instruction and argue as follows: “My 
logic teacher said our next test was going to be on arguments from analogy, but she assigned us a 
long essay on sub -atomic ph ysics instead, and demanded that we write it in Sanskrit! This is not 
fair, and tests ought to be fair. She ought to have given us a normal first -year test on arguments 
from analogy, and you thus ought to compel her to give us such a test instead of this S anskrit 
essay.”  
 
Some such argument will probably prevail over the usually -rational deans of your institution. 
Why? Because it’s a pretty strong argument, and your deans are usually rational. Some moral 
arguments are weak (or invalid), of course, but other s can be quite strong (or valid). The point is, 
morality need not be considered “simply a matter of opinion” with no grounding in the world’s 
state of affairs;  and few people consistently believe it to be so, especially when handed an unfair 
F on a test. O ne common way to argue about ethical claims is with arguments from analogy, and 
understanding how such arguments work helps us divide much of moral reasoning into that 
meriting acceptance and that warranting dismissal.  
 
For instance, consider the debate su rrounding euthanasia. A loved one is undeniably in the last 
stages of a terminal illness, and is in un -relievable pain. This person has expressed a clear wish 
84 
 to die, and asks for assistance in doing so. May the doctor or friend at hand take active steps t o 
end the life of this person? It’s a tragic situation, but unfortunately far too common. We rightly 
believe that it is at least usually wrong to kill a fellow human, but to let a someone suffer 
horribly for no apparent good seems cruel (and perhaps an exa mple of the informal fallacy of 
Accident). Argument from analogy is often used to assist in the complex conversation attempting 
to resolve this quandary.  
 
We might hear a sad but thoughtful proponent of euthanasia argue as follows: “If you were 
placed in c harge of your neighbor’s beloved pet dog while the owner was on vacation, and the 
dog is hit by a car, severely injured beyond all medical h ope of assistance, and the dog i s 
writhing in pain, surely you’d have the dog put to sleep as gently and quickly as possible. That’s 
what the owner would want. If we may do that for a dog, surely euthanasia may be an option for 
humans, too. ”  
 
An equally sad and thoughtful friend might respond: “But humans are not dogs; we have 
rationality, a soul, and we are put here on Earth by God to care for one another…not to decide 
who will live or die. No, though we may euthanize dogs, we may not take the life of terminally 
ill humans, even when their pain cannot be relieved and they wish to die.”  
 
Both persons here are arguing f rom analogy. The first person sees enough similarities between 
dogs and people (they each can be terminally ill, live with pain that cannot be relieved, and can 
have people nearby who can gently but purposefully end their lives or step back and “passively”  
withhold aid and allow them to die). Given that most people in the situation of watching after a 
neighbor’s dog would opt to euthanize the pet, the arguer believes that we’ll draw the conclusion 
that euthanasia can be a morally viable option for humans, t oo. The number of primary 
analogates is vast, as the number of potential people watching after neighbor pets is huge. 
Moreover, the case is clearly not limited to dogs: neighbors’ cats, rats, guinea pigs, and a diverse 
array of other animals serve as belov ed pets. The conclusion, moreover, is no more or less 
specific than we’d expect, especially if the arguer simply concludes that euthanasia is an option 
that may be considered. (“Thus euthanasia must be performed in every  case involving human 
suffering and terminal illness” would be far too specific given what the premises say.)  
 
The friend responds with a challenge to the first person’s argument from analogy. He holds that 
there is a relevant difference between dogs and humans. He points to humans having ra tionality, 
a soul, and a particular mandate from God as evidence for there being such a relevant difference. 
Thus, he concludes, comparing dogs to humans is like comparing apples to oranges; they are 
relevantly different things, and we cannot argue that be cause it’s morally permissible (and 
perhaps obligatory) to euthanize pets in certain tragic circumstances, it follows that it is morally 
permissible to euthanize humans in such circumstances.  
 
Which line of reasoning seems more compelling? We can imagine t he first person responding in 
turn, “Yes, there is a relevant difference between dogs and humans, but that makes my analogy 
even stronger. If it is permissible to take the life of an animal that a human loves greatly —and in 
no small part because that human  loves his pet so much —how much greater our responsibility to 
euthanize a fellow human (only under analogous or stricter circumstances, of course) who is 
85 
 loved by God even more than the pet is loved by the neighbor? If the neighbor returned home to 
hear ab out his dog’s car accident, and found his dog in great pain over the last two days, the 
neighbor would ask, ‘Why didn’t you put my dog to sleep!?’ If you wish to get theological here, 
what would your God think if He came to you after two days of your allow ing one of his beloved 
to suffer terribly? Would you say, ‘I did so because I did not wish to “play God”?’ If God l oves 
humans more than neighbors  love their pets, I’d think God would be pretty upset with you.”  
 
The argument could go on, but perh aps we can  see how arguments fro m analogy and the 
principles that guide them can play a role in moral reasoning. Consider also the issue of the use 
of animals in testing for health risks of new cosmetic products. ACME Company wants to sell a 
new shade of red lipstic k (which the world knows  we desperately need). ACME doesn’t want to 
be sued by humans who use it and have their lips fall off, so they test it on 10,000 rats first. After 
smearing the lipstick on the rats’ exposed skin, only an insignificantly small number  appeared to 
get sick from it. ACME concludes that the lipstick is likely safe for human use.  
 
ACME’s line of reasoning will work only if rats respond to the lipstick in a similar (i.e., 
analogous) way as would humans. If they did not, any results from tes ting on rats would be 
irrelevant to whether or not the product is safe for humans. ACME must think rats and humans 
are relevantly similar. “But wait,” the pro -animal activist might say, “if it’s morally wrong to test 
this lipstick on humans due to the poss ible harm it might do them, and rats and humans are 
relevantly similar, it should be morally wrong to test the lipstick on rats, too. Since either the rats 
are similar to humans or they’re not.” Sometimes logic can make your head hurt. If you were a 
logici an listening in on this conversation, how would you help clarify the use of argument from 
analogy here?  
86 
 Chapter 9: Categorical Patterns  
 
The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle (384 -322 BC) is the first we know of to place in writing 
a detailed analysis o f what we call categorical logic. Logicians may have been doing similar 
work in India a century or two earlier , but we have no written record to verify the date. 
Categorical logic is the study of arguments made up of categorical statements. Such arguments 
include categorical syllogisms (with two premises), like this one:  
 
All dogs are mammals.  
Some dogs are pets.   
Therefore, certainly at least some mammals are pets.  
 
They also include  immediate inferences (with one premise) like the following:  
 
Some fish are sharks.  
Thus, some sharks are fish.  
 
In the first argument the terms dogs , mammals , and pets refer to categories of things, while the 
words all and some  specify the quantity  of things in those categories. The first premise of this 
argument indicates th at all the members of the dog category belong to the category of mammals; 
the second premise says that some members of the dog category belong to the pet category, and 
so on. Similar analysis applies to the second argument.  
 
As an aside, we could be a little bit more  precise here. A sentence is a grammatically correct 
string of words, like “Juan is from Spain.” This sentence has 15 letters in it, and begins with a 
capital J. The statement is what is claimed; in this case it’s claimed that a particular guy n amed 
Juan is from the country of Spain. Sentences are thus often used to convey the meaning behind a 
statement. Statements are —by definition —either true or false, that is, they have a truth value  of 
True or False. We may disagree on the truth value of a st atement, or we may be unable to 
determine with any confidence what the truth value of a given statement is, but —given a 
specified meaning, context, and perspective —it will be either true or false, and never both and 
never neither. Questions, commands, sugg estions, or exclamations are examples of sentences 
that are not statements. Although statements are true or false, it would make little sense to say 
that a statement  has 15 letters in it. All that said, we will often use the words statement and 
sentence interchangeably in a somewhat loose fashion . 
 
Categorical Statement Forms  
A categorical statement  is any claim  that all or some  of one specified category of things  belong s 
to (or do not belong to ) a second category of things. Of course, some statements are t rue, and 
some are false, but either way they declare that something is the case. For example, “All cats are 
mammals” is a true categorical statement since it says that all the members of the category of 
cats belong  to the category of mammals. “Some black m ice are not rodents” is a false categorical 
statement because it erroneously claims that at least one (in Logic, “some” means one or more) 
87 
 black mouse is not a rodent. So, “All cats are mammals” has a truth value of True, while “Some 
black mice are not rod ents” has a truth value of False.  
 
There are four basic forms of categorical statements. Examples of each include:    
 
All dogs are animals.  
No dogs are animals.  
Some dogs are animals.  
Some dogs are not animals.  
 
Each statement consists of four parts:  
 
quantifier —subject term —copula —predicate term  
 
The quantifier always comes first, followed by a subject term made up of a word or phrase 
picking out a class of things. Next comes the copula. The predicate term invariably comes last. A 
categorical statement co ntains nothing else. It’s a nice, clean, consistent pattern.  
 
The quantifier  (All, No, or Some ) tells us the quantity or number of things the statement is talking 
about (e.g., dogs). The words are and are not is each called a copula  because it joins, or 
“copulates,” the subject term with the predicate term. In this case the first statement’s quantifier 
(All) teams up with the copula ( are) to assert that all the members of the subject category belong 
to the predicate category, which is to say, that every dog  is included within the animal category. 
An A statement thus always claims that every member of a certain class is part of another 
(predicate) class.  (Logicians do seem to have a way of making the simple complex, don’t they?)  
 
The subject term of a stateme nt indicates what the statement is about. A term is a word or phrase 
(usually a plural noun) that picks out a group of things. A category  or class  is a group of things 
that have a specified characteristic in common. For example, the category of dogs consis ts of all 
things that have in common the characteristic of being a dog. The subject term  in all four 
examples above is “dogs” and refers to a category or class of things: dogs. The predicate term  
(“animals”) also denotes a category or class —in this case, a nimals. If the subject term tells us 
what the statement is about (e.g., dogs), the predicate term tells us what we are to know about 
them (e.g., that they are or are not animals). A term may consist of more than one word. For 
instance, “black cats” is one term, as is “dogs that bark all night long and leave ghastly presents 
on my doorstep each morning.”  
 
So, for the categorical statement, “Some large dogs are golden retrievers that bark incessantly,” 
the quantifier is “Some,” the subject term is “large dogs ,” the copula is “are,” and the predicate 
term is “golden retrievers that bark incessantly.”  
 
**Practice Problems: Parts of Categorical Statements  
For each of the following categorical statements, state its (a) quantifier, (b) subject term, (c) 
copula, (d)  predicate term, and (e) truth value.  
 
88 
 1. Some dogs are poodles.  
2. No peacocks are bright fish.  
3. All black bears are polar bears.  
4. Some reptiles are not lizards.  
5. No dogs that do not bark much are animals that are feline.  
6. Some animals that are fa st are not cats that are not purple.  
7. All fully green parrots are birds that are not white.  
8. Some green beans are not vegetables.  
9. Some logicians are male professors.  
10. No college students are people who are biology majors.  
 
Answers:  
1. (a) Some, ( b) dogs, (c) are, (d) poodles, (e) True  
2. (a) No, (b) peacocks, (c) are, (d) bright fish, (e) True  
3. (a) All, (b) black bears, (c) are, (d) polar bears, (e) False  
4. (a) Some, (b) reptiles, (c) are not, (d) lizards, (e) True  
5. (a) No, (b) dogs that do n o bark much, (c) are, (d) animals that are feline, (e) True  
6. (a) Some, (b) animals that are fast, (c) are not, (d) cats that are not purple, (e) True  
7. (a) All, (b) fully green parrots, (c) are, (d) birds that are not white, (e) True  
8. (a) Some, (b) gr een beans, (c) are not, (d) vegetables, (e) False  
9. (a) Some, (b) logicians, (c) are, (d) male professors, (e) True  
10. (a) No, (b) college students, (c) are, (d) people who are biology majors, (e) False  
 
Standard Form Categorical Statements  
 
Aristotle be lieved that we could take any declarative sentence and translate it into a standard 
form categorical statement. He was not quite correct in this broad claim, but he was right to think 
that it’s true in many cases. We will say here that a  categorical statem ent is in standard form if it 
matches precisely one of the four categorical patterns below (where S is the subject term and P is 
the predicate term):  
 
All S are P  
No S are P  
Some S are P  
Some S are not P  
 
Here are examples of non -standard form statements c hanged into equivalent categorical 
statements:  
 
Non-standard: Dogs are animals. [There is no quantifier.]  
Standard: All dogs are animals.  
 
Non-standard: Some cats are black. [“B lack” is not a term; it’s an adjective.]  
Standard: Some cats are black things. [“Black things” is a term picking out a group of things.]  
 
89 
 Non-standard: A few fish are large animals.  
Standard: Some fish are large animals. [“Some” is a standard quantifier; “A few” is not.]  
 
Non-standard: All birds are not reptiles. [“ All S are not P” is not a standard form.]  
Standard: No birds are reptiles.  
 
Non-standard: A salmon is a fish. [There is no quantifier.]  
Standard: All salmon are fish.  
 
Non-standard: Mark is tall.  
Standard: All persons identical to Mark are tall persons.  
 
Non-standard: Only males are boys.  
Standard: All boys are males.  
 
Non-standard: If something is a dog, then it’s a mammal.  
Standard: All dogs are mammals.  
 
Non-standard: If something is a parrot, then it’s not a fish.  
Standard: No parrots are fish.  
 
Non-standard: Bob is nowh ere to be found.  
Standard: No places are places in which Bob is found.  
 
The ancient Romans considered declarative statements that did not fit the patterns of standard 
form categorical statements (we’ll study some of these statements in the next chapter). F or 
instance, “All cats are either animals or rocks,” “Bob ate pasta or a hamburger,” “If Sara is a 
mother, then she is a wife,” “It is false that pizza is a basic food group,” and “The beer tastes 
good if and only if it’s cold” do not fit into categorical patterns in any clean, straightforward 
way. Still, many ordinary declarative sentences can be turned into categorical statements, and 
once we do that, the arguments that they make up are more easily assessed as valid or invalid.  
 
**Practice Problems: Trans lating i nto Standard Categorical Form  
Rewrite the following English claims into the standard categorical form of an A, E, I, or O 
statement.  
 
1. Every cat is an animal.  
2. All birds are not fish.  
3. A few mice are rodents.  
4. Most ducks are birds.  
5. All h orses are fast.  
6. Some rich realtors are Republicans.  
7. Parrots are birds.  
8. Only mammals are pigs.  
9. None but animals are llamas.  
90 
 10. Julio is a logic teacher.  
11. Beijing is in China.  
12. Most fish swim.  
13. I do not love Molly.  
14. Some animals live  in caves.  
15. Bob always wears a hat.  
16. Whoever studies will do well on the test.  
17. A dog is not a cat.  
18. If something is a goose, then it’s a bird.  
19. Love is everywhere.  
20. The only people who voted for Tran are women.  
 
Answers:  
1. All cats are animals. All C are A.  
2. No birds are fish. No B are F.  
3. Some mice are rodents. Some M are R.  
4. Some ducks are birds. Some D are B.  
5. All horses are fast things. All H are F.  
6. Some wealthy realtors are Republicans. Some W are R.  
7. All parrots are bi rds. All P are B.  
8. All pigs are mammals. All P are M.  
9. All llamas are animals. All L are A  
10. All people identical to Julio are logic teachers. All J are L.  
11. All things identical to Beijing are things in China. All B are C.  
12. Some fish are swimme rs. Some F are S.  
13. No people identical to me are people who love Molly. No M are L.  
14. Some animals are things that live in caves. Some A are L.  
15. All people identical to Bob are people who wear a hat. All B are W.  
16. All people who study are people  who will do well on the test. All S are W.  
17. No dogs are cats. No D are C.  
18. All geese are birds. All G are B.  
19. All places are places with love. All P are L  
20. All people who voted for Tran are women. All P are W.  
Quantity and Quality  
 
Two further  properties of logical forms must be defined to make talking about and using them 
later easier. Every categorical statement has a quantity  and a quality . The quantity is universal  if 
the statement makes a claim about every  member of the subject -term catego ry, and the quantity 
is particular  if the statement makes a claim about some  members of the category referred to by 
the subject term. In standard form categorical statements, the universal quantity is expressed by 
the quantifiers all or no, while the parti cular quantity is expressed by the quantifier some .  
 
Thus a sentence such as “All cows are mammals” is a universal statement, since it makes a claim 
about every member of the subject category. “No salmon are fish” is also universal, because it 
too makes a  claim about everything by its subject term, “salmon.” In contrast, statements such as 
91 
 “Some dogs are poodles” and “Some dogs are not cats” are particular since they talk about only 
some (i.e., at least one) of the subject category.  
 
Each statement also h as one of two qualities : affirmative  or negative . A statement is affirmative 
if and only if it claims that such -and-such is true of all or some of the subject class. “All dogs are 
animals” and “Some dogs are animals” are both affirmative statements. A stat ement is negative 
if and only if it claims that such -and-such is not true of all or some of the subject class. “No birds 
are parrots” and “Some tigers are not horses” are negative statements. Note that affirmative is not 
the same as positive . Affirmative  refers to statements, while positive  refers to numbers.  
 
It has been customary since Europe’s Medieval Period to name the two affirmative forms A and I 
(from the first two vowels of the Latin word affirmo , meaning “I affirm”), and to label the two 
negative forms E and O (from the two vowels in the Latin word nego , meaning “I deny”).  
 
Name       Quantity / Quality   Standard Form  
A  Universal / Affirmative  All S are P  
E   Universal / Negative   No S are P  
I   Particular / Affirmative  Some S are P  
O   Particula r / Negative   Some S are not P  
 
**Practice Problems: Characteristics of Categorical Statements  
I. For each of the categorical statements below, determine its name (or type; i.e., A, E, I, or O), 
quantity, and quality.  
 
1. No salmon are eels.  
2. Some antelo pe are not prairie denizens.  
3. All mountain goats are acrobatic animals.  
4. Some parakeets that live in cages are birds that do not sing.  
 
Answers:  
1. E, universal, negative  
2. O, particular, negative  
3. A, universal, affirmative  
4. I, particular, affirm ative  
 
II. Given a statement with the one characteristic provided below, what can be said about that 
statement’s other two characteristics? The statement is…  
 
1. an E statement.  
2. a negative statement.  
3. an I statement.  
4. an affirmative statement.  
5. a universal statement.  
6. a particular statement.  
92 
 7. an A statement.  
8. an O statement.  
 
Answers:  
1. The statement would be universal and negative.  
2. The statement would be E and universal, or O and particular.  
3. The statement would be particular and affir mative.  
4. The statement would be A and universal, or I and particular.  
5. The statement would be A and affirmative, or E and negative.  
6. The statement would be I and affirmative, or O and negative.  
7. The statement would be universal and affirmative.  
8. The statement would be particular and negative.  
 
Existential and Hypothetical Interpretations  
Before we look at categorical argument patterns closely, there’s an issue we must understand. 
Universal statements like “All trout are fish” and “No birds are pig s” are ambiguous. It took over 
2000 years for logicians to figure this out clearly, but the English logician and mathematician 
George Boole (1815 -1864) pointed out two different meanings behind these A and E statements . 
(There is no such ambiguity in parti cular I and O stat ements, so they are no problem.)  
 
Imagine two friends sitting down at a local watering hole sharing a pitcher of Elysian Brewing 
Company’s Dragonstooth Oatmeal Stout. One sighs and says, “All the dogs in my neighborhood 
are barkers.” What  should the other friend think the first is saying? It’s obvious, right? Any 
normal person having a normal conversation would think the weary guy is claiming that (i) dogs 
exist in his neighborhood, and (ii) they’re all barkers. That’s why his friend shoul d take pity on 
him and buy the next round of stout.  
 
Later in the evening, the first guy begins reminiscing about college classes he took, and recalls a 
course on mythology. “You know,” he says, “all unicorns are white creatures.” The friend, who 
also went  to college and is both informed and intellectually adept, agrees. But wait! Does this 
friend think that his buddy is saying that (i) unicorns exist, and (ii) they’re all white creatures?? 
Of course not. Any of us would understand the reminiscing friend as  claiming only one thing: If 
there were any unicorns (and he’s not saying there are), then they would all be white creatures. 
We can all agree to that, just as we all agree that all vampires are bloodsuckers (i.e., if there were 
any vampires, then they wou ld all be bloodsuckers).  
 
This second interpretation of A (and E) statements does not assume the things referred to in the 
subject term exist. In the first case about barking dogs, the interpretation did make that 
existential assumption. In everyday conve rsation, native English speakers bounce from one 
interpretation to the other without a problem, as we somehow understand people’s intended 
meaning. Logicians have simply made this distinction clear and explained how it can impact an 
argument.  
 
93 
 The first co mmonsense interpretation goes by various names: the existential or traditional or 
Aristotelian interpretation. The second interpretation that makes no assumption about the 
existence of things is often called the hypothetical or modern or Boolean interpreta tion. For 
consistency, we’ll here use the first option of each.  
 
As we think about the logical relations among categorical statements, we should consider 
whether the subject terms refer to existing things. Again, particular statements (of the form 
“Some S are P” or “Some S are not P”) have existential import, as they claim to be about existing 
things. For such statements to be true, their subject terms must refer to existing things. However, 
for universal statements (i.e., of the form “All S are P” or  “No S  are P”), we need to consider 
whether the person making the claim believes that the things referred to by the subject term exist. 
If we assume that the subject terms of statements refer to existing things, we are giving the 
statement an existential  interpr etation. If we do not assume that the subject terms refer to existing 
things, we are giving the statement a hypothetical interpretation.  
 
In everyday life we sometimes state a universal affirmative or universal negative statement 
without presupposing that the subject term refers to existing entities. For instance, a logic teacher 
may write in her syllabus, “All students who receive an A on each of their tests will receive an A 
for the course,” or stated in more standard form for a categorical statement, “Al l students who 
receive an A on each of their tests are students who will receive an A for the course.” She means 
it, but her statement does not presuppose that there will be any students who receive an A on 
each of their tests, as she understands that the best student for that class may receive all As 
except for one B+ (which still might result in an A for the course). Another teacher may say, “No 
late papers are eligible for extra credit.” He means it, but his statement does not assume there are, 
or will b e, late papers. So sometimes in everyday communication we make A or E statements 
when we do not assume that the subject terms refers to things that exist.  
 
That said, in normal, everyday conversation, when we consider A or E statements, we are 
assuming (co nsciously or not) that the subject terms refer to things that exist. Most of the time 
when we utter A or E statements, they are about existing things like dogs or pints  of ale. This is 
largely why for so many centuries only the existential viewpoint was co nsidered. And that is why 
it makes such immediate and intuitive sense to argue that if all dogs are animals, that it must then 
be the case that some dogs (i.e., at least one dog) are animals.  
 
Fortunately making the existential/hypothetical distinction is relatively easy: If a universal 
categorical statement’s subject term refers to something that either does not exist or that we do 
not wish to assume to exist, we use the hypothetical interpretation. If a categorical statement’s 
subject term refers to somet hing the arguer believes to exist, then we are warranted in assuming 
the existential interpretation. So, if an argument is about dogs and pints of ale, then unless we 
have reason to believe otherwise, we should assume that the arguer knows such things exis t and 
is intending her A or E statements to be understood as having existential import. If an argument 
is about unicorns, meat -eating vegetarians, square circles, or hypothetical straight -A students, 
then we should assume that the arguer does not intend to  be understood as assuming the things 
referred to by the premises’ subject terms exist.  
 
94 
 A set of apparent problems may arise, but are easily dealt with. Sometimes it is challenging to 
know with any degree of certainty what an arguer intends by an A or E s tatement. Does she 
present it intending an existential or hypothetical interpretation? If you are talking face to face 
with a person, you can ask her: “Are you assuming that the subject terms of your premises refer 
to existing things?” If she’s willing to answer, you know how to interpret her claims. Also, some 
benighted people actually believe in unicorns and vampires. Fine; interpret their A or E claims 
about unicorns and vampires using the existential viewpoint. The argument may turn out to be 
valid, but  the premise in question is false given this interpretation (although your confused friend 
may think it true). If you do not have the opportunity to determine what the arguer believes 
regarding the existence of the things referred to by the subject terms o f his premises, you are left 
relying on an understanding of the context. For instance, if an argument is about objects traveling 
at or near the speed of light, you’d need to know something about massive objects in motion 
accelerating toward such speeds to know how best to interpret an argument referring to such 
things. Finally, if you are completely unable to determine if an arguer  believe s in the existence of 
the things referred to by the subject terms of the premises, you can always assess the argument 
using the existential interpretation, and then assess it again using the hypothetical interpretation. 
If the argument comes out valid only one way, th en in charity assume the arguer  intended that 
meaning. If the argument is valid both ways, then its logic is  good regardless of the interpretation 
taken. If it comes out invalid both ways, then the argument is a piece of junk and the arguer 
should hold his or her head in shame ( and buy the next round of stout).  
 
**Practice Problems: Existential vs. Hypothetical Interpretations  
For each claim below, are you justified in giving it an existential or a hypothetical interpretation? 
What would the statement then be saying?  
 
1. All tigers are cats.  
2. No vampires are nudist sunbathers.  
3. Some animals are amphibians.  
4. All presently existing brontosauruses are big animals.  
5. No frogs are fish.  
6. Some circular rectangles are not geometric figures.  
 
Answers:  
1. Existential because tigers exist; (i) tigers exist, and (ii) all of them are cats.  
2. Hypothetical because we know that vampires do not exist; if vampires existed, then none of 
them would be nudist sunbathers.  
3. Trick question! This is an I statement, and particular statements are not ambiguous; the clear 
and unambiguous meaning is: (i) animals exist, and (ii) so me of them are amphibians.  
4. Hypothetical because no brontosaurus presently exists; if brontosauruses existed presently, 
then they would all be big animals.  
5. Existential because frogs exist; (i) frogs exist, and (ii) none of them are fish.  
6. Trick ques tion again! Particular statements are unambiguous, and one does not need to make 
an existential/hypothetical distinction for them. The meaning of this false statement is clear: (i) 
circular rectangles exist, and (ii) some are not geometric figures.  
 
95 
 Catego rical Inference Patterns  
 
There are a handful of basic categorical patterns of inference that are worth knowing. If we are 
familiar with these few patterns, we can avoid making common invalid inferences, and we can 
detect easily when someone else is foisti ng them upon us. In so doing, we’ll be more adept at 
creating and assessing some basic immediate inferences. For now, and until we say we should do 
otherwise, let’s consider only arguments and statements about things that exist. We’ll thus be 
taking the ex istential interpretation of universal statements (i.e., A and E statements) for now. 
Later, when we wish to make claims about unicorns or meat -eating vegetarians, we’ll need to 
assume the hypothetical interpretation. But let’s put that off for the time bei ng. We will here 
examine the following categorical patterns:  
 
Contradiction  
Contrary  
Subcontrary  
Subalternation  
Obversion  
Conversion  
Contraposition  
 
Contradiction  
 
Two statements are said to be contradictory, or are  a contradiction , if and only if whenever  one 
is true the other is false, and whenever one is false, the other is true. Regarding categorical 
statements, a n A statement will contradict an O version of itself, and vice versa; an E statement 
will contradict an I version of itself, and vice versa. L et’s look at some examples.  
 
All dogs are animals (True) – Some dogs are not animals (False)  
All cats are fish (False) – Some cats are not fish (True)  
No mice are birds (True) – Some mice are birds (False)  
No lions are cats (False) – Some lions are cats (T rue) 
 
We can be confident that our knowledge of the truth value of any statement can let us know the 
truth value of its contradictory statement. Thus, if we know that an I statement is false, we can 
justifiably infer that its contradictory E version is tru e (because I and E versions of a claim 
contradict each other, so if the first one is false, the second one must be true).  
 
Aristotle presented  these patterns in terms of a “Square of O pposition,” a pictorial way of 
envisioning how Contradiction and other i nference patterns work. Imagine a square with an X 
inside, and each corner representing a categorical statement:  
 
                                  A               E    A: All S are P  
        E: No S are P  
        I: Some S are P  
            I     O    O: Some S are not P  
96 
  
Each line represents a categorical logic pattern. Contradiction is represented by the X inside the 
square. A contradicts O, and E contradicts I. Other relations between the square’s corners are not 
contradictory, as it’s both the case that one being true does not guarantee the other being false 
and one being false does not guarantee that the other is true. For instance, A and I do not 
contradict each other, as an A statement might be true without the I version being false (e.g., “All 
dogs are animals” and “Some dogs are animals” are both true); neither do A and E contradict 
each other, as both might be false (e.g., “All dogs are poodles” and “No dogs are poodles”).  
 
Quick note: We will want to say that some statements are false. For the sake of simplicity, let’s 
abbreviate “It is false that all dogs are birds” or “It is not the case that all dogs are birds” as “F: 
All D are B.” There are symbolic ways of abbreviating this (e.g., ~(x)(Dx  Bx)), but that gets 
covered in really cool Symboli c Logic classes (like PHIL& 120 at Bellevue College or the 
University of Washington). Using F: will do the job for us in our non -symbolic Critical Thinking 
class. We can also use  immediately prior to a conclusion to abbreviate a conclusion indicator 
word  like “thus” or “therefore.”  
 
Continuing… Given the trustworthiness of the Contradiction principle, we can recognize many 
immediate inferences as valid or invalid. For instance, let’s consider the following four 
abbreviated arguments:  
 
(i) All A are B  F: Some A are not B  
 
This is a valid inference. The argument moves from an A statement (said to be true) to its O 
version (said to be false). A and O are contradictories, so if the A version is true, then we should 
be able to conclude that the O version is f alse. 
 
(ii) Some G are W  No G are W  
 
This argument is invalid. The premise is an I statement, and the conclusion is an E version of the 
same statement. They are thus contradictories. So, if the I statement is supposed to be true, then 
the E version shoul d be false, but the conclusion claims the E version is true. That’s a mistake 
according to Contradiction. The argument is thus guilty of the formal fallacy known as Illicit 
Contradiction , and it’s thereby invalid.  
 
(iii) F: Some K are not P  All K are P  
 
Valid! The inference moves from a false O statement to a true A version of that statement. O and 
A have a contradictory relationship, so if the first is false, the second needs to be true, which is 
what the argument claims.  
 
(iv) F: No Q are S  F: Some Q are S  
 
Invalid! The premise is an E statement that is being denied, and the conclusion is the I version of 
the premise. But, according to Contradiction, E and I versions of the same statement must have 
97 
 contradictory truth values; so if the E statement maki ng up the premise is false, the concluding I 
version should be true. But the argument claims the I version is false. It’s a screwed up use of 
Contradiction (i.e., Illicit Contradiction).  
 
One additional point needs to be driven home. For two statements to be contradictory, they must 
have the same subject and predicate terms. The following two  inference s look a bit like 
contradiction s, since we are moving in the first case from an A statement to an O statement , and 
in the second case from an I statement to a n E statement . But the conclusion  for each is not the 
contradictory version of the argument’s premise . Note that the terms have been switched. Th ese 
inference s are thus not  direct contradiction s. The first argument happens to be invalid, and the 
second hap pens to be valid, but it’s not due to failing or succeeding respectively in matching the 
Contrad iction pattern . 
 
All A are B   F: Some B are not A  
F: Some U are W   No W are U  
 
**Practice Problems: Contradiction  
Determine for each immediate inference bel ow whether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Contradict ion. 
 
1. Some A are not B  F: All A are B  
2. F: All N are J  F: Some N are not J  
3. No Y are E  F: Some Y are E  
4. F: No L are D  Some L are D  
5. F: No M are C  F: Some M are C  
6. All H are T  F: Some H are not T  
7. All X are B  Some X are not B  
8. F: Some U are not I  All U are I  
9. Some K are Z  F: No K are Z  
10. F: Some A are N  No A are N  
11. Some S are Y  No S are Y  
12. F: Some P are not I  F: All P are I  
 
Answers:  
1. valid   5. invalid   9. valid  
2. invalid   6. valid   10. valid  
3. valid   7. invalid   11. invalid  
4. valid   8. valid   12. invalid  
 
Contrary  
 
We can now move through the remaining patterns a little more quickly, as we’ll use each in 
analogous ways. The relation between A an d E versions of a statement is called Contrary . The 
principle behind Contrary is that if you have an A and an E version of a statement, at least one of 
98 
 them must be false ; they cannot both be true. Consider any A statement that you know to be true, 
and its  E version will have to be false. For any E statement known to be true, its A version will 
be false. For example:  
 
All dogs are animals. Thus, it is false that no dogs are animals.  
No mice are fish. Thus, it is false that all mice are fish.  
 
Contrary does not say that at least one of an A and E pair must be true, as it is indeed possible 
(although not always the case) that both may be false. For instance, “All dogs are poodles” and 
“No dogs are poodles” are both false. However, if we know that an A or E sta tement is true, then 
we can infer deductively that it’s contrary is false. So, the following inferences will be valid:  
 
All A are G  F: No A are G  
No H are I  F: All H are I  
 
The following inferences relate two contraries, but they misuse use the princip le, or pattern, of 
Contrary:  
 
F: All J are E  F: No J are E  
No U are T  All U are T  
 
Contrary works between A and E versions of a statement, and only tells us that if one is true, the 
other is false. If we begin knowing that one is false, the other might  be true or it might be false; 
all we know is that at least one of them must be false, but if we know the first is false from the 
beginning, the second statement’s truth value is undetermined (i.e., we do not have enough 
information to guarantee its truth value). If we misuse Contrary, we are guilty of the formal 
fallacy of Illicit Contrary . 
 
Note that the following two immediate inferences are not examples of Contrary, as the 
conclusion is not an E (or A) version of the A (or E) premise. For two statements  to be contrary 
to each other, each must have the same subject and predicate terms.  
 
All A are B   F: No B are A  
No J are B   F: All B are J  
 
**Practice Problems: Contrary  
Determine for each immediate inference below whether it’s a valid or invalid appea l to Contrary.  
 
1. No J are E  All J are E  
2. All K are W  F: No K are W  
3. F: All I are R  No I are R  
4. All O are D  No O are D  
5. F: No M are N  F: All M are N  
6. No S are I  F: All S are I  
99 
 7. F: All I are W  F: No I are W  
8. F: No Y are D  All Y are D  
 
Answers:  
1. invalid   5. invalid  
2. valid   6. valid  
3. invalid   7. invalid  
4. invalid   8. invalid  
 
Subcontrary  
 
The Subcontrary  pattern is found at the bottom o f Aristotle’s Square of O pposition, on the line 
between I and O statements. Note the p refix “sub,” and think “ submarine,” a ship that moves 
underwater and below its surface. It’s underneath Contrary. For Subcontrary, at least one of the 
two statements must be true ; they cannot both be false. F or example, i f “Some dogs are fish” is 
false, th en the O version of that statement must be true: “Some dogs are not fish.”  Or consider 
“Some cats are animals” and “Some cats are not animals.” The first is true, and the second is 
false. There is no way both could be false.  
 
So, if we know an I or O state ment is false , we can infer that its subcontrary (the O or I version 
of that statement respectively) is true. If we begin by knowing that the I or O statement is true, 
we cannot infer the truth value of its subcontrary, as it’s undetermined; we already kno w one of 
the pair is true, so the Subcontrary pattern is fulfilled: at least one is true. It would be a fallacious 
guess on our part to infer that the other is true, too. Such a misuse of Subcontrary is called Illicit 
Subcontrary.  
 
Here are two more exampl es of valid inferences appealing to Subcontrary:  
 
F: Some H are P  Some H are not P  
F: Some J are not U  Some J are U  
 
Let’s also look at two inferences that look a little bit like Sub contrary , but do not actually fit that 
pattern because the premise and  conclusion do not have the same subject and predicate terms  
(they’ve been switched) . 
 
F: Some H are not E   Some E are H  
F: Some A are B   F: Some B are not A  
 
**Practice Problems: Subcontrary  
Determine for each immediate inference below whether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Subcontrary.  
 
1. Some Y are T  Some Y are not T  
2. Some K are J  F: Some K are not J  
100 
 3. Some L are not E  Some L are E  
4. Some G are not R  Some G are R  
5. F: Some Y are not I  Some Y are I  
6. F: Some D are not Q  F: Some D  are Q  
7. F: Some A are C  Some A are not C  
8. F: Some I are W  F: Some I are not W  
 
Answers:  
1. invalid   5. valid  
2. invalid   6. invalid  
3. invalid   7. valid  
4. invalid   8. invalid  
 
Subalternation  
 
The two vertical lines of the  Square of O pposition repr esent the pattern we’ll call Subalternation . 
A and I, as well as E and O, are subalterns of each other. This pattern is a bit more comp licated 
than the others in the Square of O pposition, but it’s intuitive. Subalternation says that if we know 
a universal statement to be true, then we may confidently infer that its particular subaltern  below 
on the Square  is true, too. So, if we know that “All dogs are animals” is true, then we can infer 
that “Some dogs are animals” is true, also. Moreover, if we know that “No dogs are cats” is true, 
then we can infer that “Some dogs are not cats” is true, too.  
 
It does not work the other way, though. If we know the universal statement is false, that does not 
guarantee anything about its subaltern. Consider the following two  examples:  
 
No animals  are cats [which is  false]. Thus, some animals are  not cats [which is true].  
No dogs are mammals  [which is false]. Thus, some dogs are not mammals  [which is false].  
 
The structure of each inference is the same, but the falsity of the premise does not guarantee the 
truth value of the conclusion. It’s a misuse of Sub alternation , and it’s called —get ready for 
this—Illicit Sub alternation .  
 
Subalternation  has a  second function. If we know an I or O statement is false, then we can 
confident ly infer that its subaltern above (A and O respectively) is false, too. For if it’s false that, 
say, some dogs are birds, it’s certainly false that all dogs are birds. And, if it’s false that some 
cats are not animals, then it’s surely false that no cats a re animals. It’s kind of like the opposite 
of the first function or use of Subalternation.  
 
Memory aid: A perfectly idiotic memory device for Subalternation is this, “Truth reigns down 
from Heaven, while falsity rises up from the pit of Hell!” If you have any theological leanings at 
all, this may resonate with you. Truth comes from Heaven above and drips down on us m ortals. 
Lies and falsehood rise  up from the devilish mire of Hades . Falsehood never comes down from 
Heaven, nor does truth ever go up from the Satan ic Abyss . 
 
101 
 Here are some examples of valid Subalternation inferences:  
 
All J are T  Some J are T                                                       T                                                       
No R are K  Some R are not K  
F: Some I a re not H  F: No I are H  
F: Some U are E  F: All U are E                                                        F                   
 
And here are some invalid examples of Illicit Subalternation.:  
 
F: All O are T  Some O are T  
No R are K  F: Some R are n ot K 
Some P are not H  No P are H  
F: Some W are P  All W are P  
 
One again —as with the other patterns so far —let’s also look at two inferences that look a little 
bit like this rule (Subalternation), but which do not actually fit that pattern because the p remise 
and conclusion do not have the same subject and predicate terms (again, they’ve been switched).  
 
All J are I   Some I are not J  
F: Some N are not U   F: No U are N  
 
**Practice Problems: Subalternation  
Determine for each immediate inference below w hether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Subalternation.  
 
1. All J are R  Some J are R  
2. F: All I are O  Some I are O  
3. F: All K are W  F: Some K are W  
4. All P are H  F: Some P are H  
5. No K are Q  Some K are not Q  
6. F: No L are V  Some L are not  V 
7. F: Some Y are L  F: All Y are L  
8. F: Some S are not O  F: No S are O  
9. Some I are E  All I are E  
10. F: Some N are C  All N are C  
11. Some Z are not O  No Z are O  
12. F: Some J are not H  No J are H  
 
Answers:  
1. valid   5. valid   9. invalid  
2. invalid   6. invalid   10. invalid  
3. invalid   7. valid   11. invalid  
4. invalid   8. valid   12. invalid  
 
102 
 Obversion  
 
The final three categorical patterns we’ll  examine fall outside the Square of O pposition.  They 
“sit alongside it” as a little group unto themselves. For the first and third, we’ll need to introduce 
a new concept: a term complement . A term complement is a term that complements another term. 
That is, the things the term refers  to together with the things the term complement refers to make 
up all things existing in the universe. It’s actually quite simple. Consider the diagram below. It’s 
a picture of everything that exists. The inner box consists of all the dogs in the universe. 
Everything else in the outer box is everything that’s not fully a  dog (e.g., cats, trees, the U.S. 
Constitution, m y desire for a cheeseburger,  the CEO of Ford Motor Company, and angels 
(should they exist)).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D and non -D are term complements of each other, since every existing thing in the universe is 
either a dog or something other than a dog. So too are A and non -A, non -V and V, and non -H 
and H. In ordinary English, we probably would not say “non -P” or “non -W.” We might, though, 
say something like “All dogs are things other than fish,” which we can abbreviate as  “All D are 
non-F.” 
 
Now we can describe Obversion . This categorical logic pattern says that any categorical 
statement (A, E, I, or O) will be logically equivalent to its obvert. Obversion involves two 
moves: we take the original state ment and (i) change i ts quality  and (ii) exchange its predicate 
term for its term complement. We’ll look at one example slowly. Consider “All S are P.” It’s an 
A statement, and all A statements are universal and affirmative. To make the first change in 
Obversion, we change the  quality from affirmative to negative, leaving the quantity alone: “No S 
are P.” Now the statement is universal and negative. The second change is to swap out the 
predicate term for its term complement: “No S are non -P.” This and the original statement are  
equivalent; their truth values remain the same as they are logically saying the same thing.  
 
Additional examples to think about:  
 
Original statement    Obvert of the original statement  
Some dogs are poodles.   Some dogs are not non -poodles.  
F: No mice are r odents.   F: All mice are non -rodents.  
All lions are non -dogs.   No lions are dogs.  
F: All horses are fish.    F: No horses are non -fish. 
Some salmon are not mammals.  Some salmon are non -mammals.  
F: Some tigers are not non -birds.  F: Some tigers are birds.  
 Non-dogs  
Dogs  
103 
 Obversion maintains the original truth value, so if the original statement is true, the obvert will 
be true, too. Also, if the original statement is false, the obvert will be false, as well. The 
following are examples of mistakes using Obversion, and they ar e guilty of —you guessed it —
Illicit Obversion . These following examples are thus invalid inferences:  
 
All M are non -U  F: No M are U  
No K are M  F: All K are non -M 
F: Some J are T  Some J are not non -T 
F: Some H are not non -I  Some H are I  
 
**Practice P roblems: Obversion  
Determine for each immediate inference below whether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Obversion.  
 
1. Some K are not I  Some K are non -I 
2. No D are N  All D are non -N 
3. F: All O are non -Y  F: No O are Y  
4. F: Some Q are P  Some Q a re not non -P 
5. F: No U are E  All U are non -E 
6. All K are D  F: No K are non -D 
7. F: Some W are non -U  F: Some W are not U  
8. F: Some S are not non -R  F: Some S are R  
 
Answers:  
1. valid   5. invalid  
2. valid   6. invalid  
3. valid   7. valid  
4. invali d  8. valid  
 
Conversion  
 
Conversion simply trades the subject for the predicate term. The pattern produces a logical 
equivalence, however, only when performed on E and I statements. Here are four  examples of 
Conversion working well in valid inferences:  
 
* No dogs are cats. Thus, no cats are dogs.  
* It is false that no cats are animals. Thus, it is false that no animals are cats.  
* Some mice are mammals. Thus, some mammals are mice.  
* It is not the case that some parrots are fish. Thus, it is false that some  fish are parrots.  
 
Conversion is not reliable on A and O statements. Just because “All dogs are mammals” is true, 
its convert, “All mammals are dogs” is not the case. And, just because “Some animals are not 
fish” is true, it does not follow that “Some fis h are not animals” is true, too.  If we make a 
Conversion inference on an A or O statement, or if we fail to “keep” the original truth value, we 
104 
 are guilty of —wait for it —Illicit Conversion.  Here are some examples of invalid uses of 
conversion. Socially po lished students will avoid making these errors in public.  
 
All S are Y  All Y are S [Conversion does not work on A statements.]  
Some L are E  F: Some E are L [Conversion keeps the original truth value.]  
F: No G are E  No E are G [Again, Conversion maint ains the same truth value.]  
Some K are not Q  Some Q are not K [Conversion does not work on O statements.]  
 
Here are some valid uses of Conversion:  
 
No A are B  No B are A  
Some J are W  Some W are J  
F: No L are K  F: No K are L  
F: Some I are D  F: Som e D are I  
 
**Practice Problems: Conversion  
Determine for each immediate inference below whether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Conversion.  
 
1. Some K are T  Some T are K  
2. F: All I are Y  All Y are I  
3. All O are P  All P are O  
4. No M are N  No N are M  
5. F: Some G are W  F: Some W are G  
6. F: No Q are W  No W are Q  
7. Some E are not I  Some I are not E  
8. F: Some O are not B  F: Some B are not O  
 
Answers:  
1. valid   5. valid  
2. invalid   6. invalid  
3. invalid   7. invalid  
4. valid   8. invalid  
 
Contraposition  
 
Our last categorical pattern is Contraposition . Like Obversion and Conversion, if Contraposition 
is performed correctly, the truth value of the contrapositive is the same as the original statement, 
that is, the two statements will be logic ally equivalent. Contraposition (like Obversion) requires 
two steps. The order is unimportant, but two changes take place moving from an original 
statement to its contrapositive: (i) exchange the two terms with each other (as you do in 
Conversion), then (i i) exchange each term with its term complement.  
 
105 
 Consider “All dogs are animals,” or “All D are A.” If we do the first step, we get “All A are D.”  
The second step swaps out each newly traded term with its own term complement: “All non -A 
are non -D.” It may  be a headache to think about, but in English is says, “All things other than 
animals [e.g., plants, rocks, ballpoint pens] are things other than dogs [e.g., cats, fish, plants, 
rocks, ballpoint pens]. Or put another way, “Everything that is not an animal can’t be a dog,” 
because if you’re not an animal, you can’t be a dog.  
 
Contraposition “works” only on A and O statements; inferences using Contraposition are not 
reliable on E and I statements. For instance, consider the following invalid uses of 
Contrapos ition:  
 
No dogs are cats. Thus, no non -cats are non -dogs.  
Some animals are non -dogs. Thus, some dogs are non -animals.  
 
In both cases, the premise is true and the conclusion is false, showing the inferences to be 
invalid. Such an ill -advised inference may b e called Illicit Contraposition . With A and O 
statements, however Contraposition will guarantee that the contrapositive (i.e., the second 
statement) is equivalent; and thus if we are making an inference with them using Contraposition, 
if the premise is tru e, the conclusion will be guaranteed to be true, too.  
 
Here are some examples of valid uses of Contraposition:  
 
All non -A are H  All non -H are A  
F: All J are B  F: All non -B are non -J 
Some K are non -I  Some I are non -K 
F: Some non -O are non -G  F: Some G are O  
All U are M  All non -M are non -U 
 
Memory aid: Obversion, Conversion, and Contraposition are a bit different from the rule s 
associated directly with the Square of O pposition. With these three, one works on all statements 
(Obversion), one works only  on E and I (Conversion), and one works only on A and O 
(Contraposition). How might students remember which is which? Maybe this will help:  
 
Obversion is the odd one in that it works on all four statements. [“ Obversion” and “ odd” begin 
with “ o.”] Conversio n and Contraposition are cranky, as they work on only two types of 
statements. [Note that cranky, Conversion, and Contraposition all begin with “ c.”] 
Conv ersion works only on E and I. [Note the middle vowels of “Conv ersion.”]  
Contr aposition works only on A and O. [Note the middle vowels of “Contr aposition.”]  
 
**Practice Problems: Contraposition  
Determine for each immediate inference below whether it’s a valid or invalid appeal to 
Contraposition.  
 
1. Some Y are non -P  Some P are non -Y 
2. F: All J are E  F: All non -E are non -J 
106 
 3. Some K are not W  F: Some non -W are not non -K 
4. No U are V  No non -V are non -U 
5. F: Some S are not non -L  F: Some L are not non -S 
6. All non -K are non -C  All C are K  
7. All Q are M  F: All non -M are non -Q 
8. Some O are not no n-N  Some N are not non -O 
 
Answers:  
1. invalid    5. valid  
2. valid    6. valid  
3. invalid    7. invalid  
4. invalid    8. valid  
 
Putting it All Together  
 
Now that we’ve learned seven categorical patterns, we can now more easily and quickly assess 
many deduct ive immediate inferences as valid or invalid. If we can recognize one of these 
patterns being used, and we can determine that the use is correct or improper, then we can know 
the argument to be valid or invalid (respectively). For instance, consider the fo llowing argument: 
“All dogs are animals. Thus, it is false that no dogs are animals.” This argument containing an A 
and a negated E statement has the following structure:  
 
All D are A  F: No D are A  
 
We see here a  move from an affirmed A statement to a negated E statement , which is a use of 
Contrary. We now ask ourselves, is this a proper or improper use of Contrary? Well, Contrary 
says at least one of a pair of A and E statements must  be false, and the premise tells us that the A 
statement is true. So, we can be confident that t he E version of that statement must  be false. And 
that’s exactly what the conclusion tells us, so the argument is a correct use of Contrary, and thus 
valid.  
 
Now consider the following argument: “Some things other than dogs are tigers. Thus, some 
things other than tigers are dogs.” The argument may be abbreviated as follows:  
 
Some non -D are T  Some non -T are D  
 
This argument fits the pattern of Contraposition, but it’s a mistaken use of that pattern, as 
Contraposition only works on A and O statements. The premise here is an I statement, so the 
argument misuses Contraposition, it’s guilty of Il licit Contraposition, and it’s thus invalid.  
 
Here’s one more example:  
 
F: Some K are not I F: Some K are non -I 
 
107 
 This inference fits the pattern known as Obversion, and everything looks okay. Obversion works 
on O statements (e.g., this premise), and the false truth value of the premise is appropriately 
carried over to the conclusion.  
 
**Practice Problems: Assessing Immediate Inferences  
Consider the following immediate inferences. Each is an example of a categorical pattern 
presented above. Name the patter n and determine if the inference is valid or invalid.  
 
1. All H are N  Some H are N  
2. F: No G are H  F: No H are G  
3. F: Some A are U  No A are U  
4. F: All J are E  F: No J are E  
5. F: Some K are T  Some K are not T  
6. All G are non -Y  F: No G are Y  
7. Some S are non -P  Some P are non -S 
8. No M are non -Y  All M are Y  
9. F: Some T are not I  All T  are I 
10. F: No L are J  F: Some L are not J  
11. All D are E  All E are D  
12. All O are P  F: No O are non -P 
13. No H are E  F: All H are E  
14. All K are non -S  All S are non -K 
15. All A are B  Some A are not B  
16. No U are Q  Some U are not Q  
17. Some K are not Y  Some K are Y  
18. Some I are M  Some M are I  
19. F: Some N are not M  F: Some non -M are not non -N 
20. All Z are W  F: No Z are W  
 
Answers:  
1. Subalternation, valid   11. Conversion, invalid  
2. Conversion, valid    12. Obversion, invalid  
3. Contradiction, valid   13. Contrary, valid  
4. Contrary, invalid    14. Contraposition, valid  
5. Subcontrary, valid    15. Contradiction, invalid  
6. Obversion, invalid    16. Subalternation, valid  
7. Contraposition, invalid   17. Subcontrary, invalid  
8. Obve rsion, valid    18. Conversion, valid  
9. Contradiction, valid   19. Contraposition, valid  
10. Subalternation, invalid   20. Contrary, valid  
 
The Hypothetical Interpretation  
 
108 
 We can now revisit the issue of the ambiguity in A and E categorical statements. As you recall, 
we often mean two completely different things when we utter claims of the form “All S are P” or 
“No S are P.” So far, we’ve been focusing on the existential interpretation in which we assume 
that the person making the claim believes that the su bject term refers to existing things. But 
every now and then we want to talk about vampires, unicorns, or round squares. At these 
moments, we (who are not delusional or seriously confused) are not wishing to say that such 
things actually exist, but that if they did, they’d all be such -and-such. For instance, if the 
normally informed among us say, “All vampires are bloodsuckers,” what we’d mean is that if 
there were any vampires (and we’re not saying that there are), then t hey all would be 
bloodsuckers.  
 
We need to care about this distinction because if we are not careful with it, we can quickly end 
up “proving” that vampires exist. Consider the two arguments below:  
 
All dogs are animals. Thus, some dogs are animals.  
All vampires are bloodsuckers.  Thus, some  vampires are bloodsuckers.  
 
Both are examples of Subalternation. Doesn’t the first argument seem valid? Surely, if all dogs 
are animals, then at least some of them are. This is indeed a valid inference, but notice that the 
particular conclusion (an I stat ement) has existential import ; it’s claiming that dogs exist and that 
at least one of them is an animal. That conclusion follows from the premise because the premise 
is claiming that (i) dogs exist, and (ii) they are all animals. But now look at the vampir e 
argument. It has the same form, and the particular conclusion is claiming that vampires exist and 
at least one of them is a bloodsucker. Vampires exist!? No! What went wrong? If we mean the 
same thing with the vampire premise as we meant with the dog pre mise, we can get in trouble; 
we can end up “proving” that vampires exist, but that’s nuts.  
 
A solution is to use the existential interpretation when we have good reason to believe the person 
offering the A or E statement believes in the existence of the th ings referred to by the subject 
term, and to use the hypothetical interpretation when we understand him or her to believe the 
subject term refers to things that do not exist. We do this all the time in ordinary English 
conversation, and it’s no harder to d o here in the context of categorical logic.  
 
Note what happens when we give the premise of the vampire argument above a hypothetical 
interpretation (which is what we’d do normally in ordinary conversations). We’d understand the 
arguer to be opening his inf erence with “If there were any vampires, then they’d all be 
bloodsuckers (and we can readily agree to that, even though we don’t believe in vampires). If he 
then went on to conclude that therefore there are some vampires that are bloodsuckers, we’d say, 
“Hold on buddy! That’s an invalid inference! Just because vampires would be bloodsuckers if 
they existed does not mean that there actually are any vampires walking the Earth today. You 
really owe me another round of beer for that howler of an argument.”  
 
Okay. We now know what to do with arguments. If a premise is an A or E statement, and the 
subject term refers to things that exist, we’ll give it the existential interpretation. If the subject 
term refers to things that the arguer pretty clearly does not assu me to exist, we’ll give that A or E 
109 
 statement the hypothetical interpretation. This will keep us from taking invalid arguments and 
making them appear to be valid. Making the unjustified interpretation and thereby making an 
erroneous assessment of an infere nce is known as the Existential Fallacy . 
 
Given that A and E statements say less under the hypothetical interpretation than they do under 
the existential interpretation, fewer categorical logic patterns pertain to them. We’ve already seen 
how Subalternatio n works with arguments about dogs, but that it can misfire with arguments 
about vampires. There are thus fewer inference patterns that will be valid if we are arguing about 
vampires or leprechauns than if we are arguing about dogs or cats. The following li sts detail 
which patterns are trustworthy for each of the two interpretations:  
 
Existential Interpretation    Hypothetical Interpretation  
Contradiction      Contradiction  
Contrary      Obversion  
Subcontrary      Conversion  
Subalternation      Contraposition  
Obversion  
Conversion  
Contraposition  
 
If an inference about werewolves uses Contrary, it will automatically be an invalid argument 
(guilty of the Existential Fallacy). If an inference about horses uses Contrary, we need to see if 
Contrary is being used correct ly, and then determine whether the argument is valid or invalid. 
Here are some examples:  
 
No sharks are birds. Thus, some sharks are not birds.  
 
The premise’s subject term refers to sharks, which exist, so we use the existential interpretation. 
Given that interpretation, Subalternation gives us exactly this conclusion. The argument is thus 
valid.  
 
No mermaids are fishy -smelling swimmers. It follows that it is false that all mermaids are fishy -
smelling swimmers.  
 
The subject term of the premise is “mermaids, ” and refers to beauties that sadly do not exist. We 
are thus justified in giving this E statement the hypothetical interpretation. But Contrary is not 
reliable under such conditions, and we cannot safely draw the conclusion. This argument 
commits the Exis tential Fallacy, and is thus invalid.  
 
Some vampires are garlic haters. Therefore, some garlic haters are vampires.  
 
The premise is an I statement, so there is no ambiguity or concern over existential/hypothetical 
interpretations. The premise straightforwa rdly says that there are vampires in existence and that 
at least one is a garlic hater. Given the inferential move is Conversion, and Conversion works 
110 
 given no matter what the interpretation, the argument is valid. The argument is, of course, 
unsound, as t he premise is false (vampires do not exist).  
 
It is false that all round squares are unenclosed geometric figures. Hence, it is not the case that all 
things other than unenclosed geometric figures are things other than round squares.  
 
The subject term of t he premise here is “round squares,” which refers to things that do not exist. 
We are thus justified in using the hypothetical interpretation to understand this negated A 
premise. The inference pattern here is Contraposition, and that pattern provides a log ical 
equivalent for A and O statements, whether or not they are about things that exist. We can 
thereby say this is a proper use of Contraposition, and that the argument is valid.  
 
Note that we have examined only seven categorical inference patterns. There  are other patterns 
that can form valid or invalid immediate inferences. We have learned these seven because they 
are fairly common. Note that the following immediate inferences do not follow any of the 
patterns we have studied here:  
 
No jackrabbits are wi ldebeests. Thus, all wildebeests are jackrabbits.  
All dogs are animals. Thus, some animals are dogs.  
 
The first argument is invalid, while the second is valid. Neither, however, follows any one of our 
seven patterns. Other techniques may be used to prove s uch arguments valid or invalid (e.g., we 
can use the Counterexample Method to show the first to be invalid, if it wasn’t obvious enough 
already). For our present purposes, though, we simply want to get better at recognizing some 
common patterns —good and ba d—of fairly simple immediate inferences.  
 
**Practice Problems: Assessing Immediate Inferences  
What pattern is used in each immediate inference below? Are the following immediate 
inferences valid or invalid? Use the existential or hypothetical interpretatio n as appropriate.  
 
1. All tigers are cats. Thus, no tigers are things other than cats.  
2. No 50 -foot-tall humans are little people. Thus, no little people are 50 -foot-tall humans.  
3. All zombie strippers are sexy dead people. Thus, it is false that some zo mbie strippers are not 
sexy dead people.  
4. Some black dogs are animals that bark. Thus, it is false that some black dogs are not animals 
that bark.  
5. No rabbits are elk. Thus, it is not the case that all rabbits are elk.  
6. Some nudist vampires are pasty -skinned night dwellers. Thus, all nudist vampires are pasty -
skinned night dwellers.  
7. It is false that no balding werewolves are sad creatures. Thus, some balding werewolves are 
not sad creatures.  
8. It is false that all breakfast cereals are nutritious meals. Thus, it is false that all things other 
than nutritious meals are things other than breakfast cereals.  
9. It is false that some logic teachers are weirdoes. Thus, some logic teachers are not weirdoes.  
111 
 10. Some morally guiltless murderers are happy r obbers. Thus, it is false that some happy 
robbers are morally guiltless murderers.  
11. All jackalopes [a cross between a jackrabbit and an antelope, jokingly said to be found in 
Wyoming] are mythic creatures. Thus, some jackalopes are mythic creatures.  
12. All sandy beaches are aquatic locales. Thus, it is false that some sandy beaches are not 
aquatic locales.  
13. It is false that some pets are amoebas. Thus, some pets are not things other than amoebas.  
14. Some makers of everlasting TV sets are not things other than popular manufacturers. Thus, it 
is false that some popular manufacturers are not things other than makers of everlasting TV sets.  
15. All dogs are animals. Thus, it is false that no dogs are animals.  
16. All unicorns are fierce beasts tamable on ly by female virgins. Thus, some unicorns are not 
fierce beasts tamable only by female virgins.  
17. It is false that some dinosaurs presently living in Bellevue are large animals. Thus, some 
dinosaurs presently living in Bellevue are large animals.  
18. All  Beatle songs are great tunes. Thus, all great tunes are Beatle songs.  
19. It is false that no native turkeys are things in the USA. Thus, all native turkeys are things in 
the USA.  
20. All logic texts are joys to read. Thus, it is false that some logic tex ts are not joys to read.  
 
Answers:  
1. Obversion, valid     11. Subalternation, invalid  
2. Conversion, valid     12. Contradiction, valid  
3. Contradiction, valid    13. Obversion, invalid  
4. Subcontrary, invalid    14. Contraposition, invalid  
5. Contrary, vali d    15. Contrary, valid  
6. Subalternation, invalid    16. Contradiction, invalid  
7. Subalternation, invalid    17. Subcontrary, invalid  
8. Contraposition, valid    18. Conversion, invalid  
9. Subcontrary, valid     19. Contrary, invalid  
10. Conversion, invalid    20. Contradiction, valid  
 
Categorical Derivations  
 
Let’s take use of categorical patterns one step further. We can appeal to them to prove a n even  
wide r variety of arguments to be valid. This will be a use of natural deduction . This process 
begins with a premise , and by appealing to the rules (or patterns) of logic, shows that the 
conclusion must follows from it. That is, natural deduction  shows th at the conclusion can be 
derived from the premise . The conclusion is thus the goal we aim for, and we have a t our 
disposal to get that goal the tools of seven logic rules and the premise.  
 
The idea behind the process is simple. We take the premise, and use categorical logic rules to 
transform  it into the conclusion. The conclusion is thus our goal; it’s what we’ re aiming for. An 
example will help. Consider the following argument:  
 
112 
 All dogs are animals. Thus, it is false that some things other than animals are not things other 
than dogs.  
 
Abbreviating the argument will make it much  easier to work with. Let’s place  the conclusion 
after the premise , separating it off with a slash.  
 
All D are A  /  F: Some non -A are not non -D 
 
What we’ve done so far in our work in categorical logic is to look for a single categorical rule 
being used (e.g ., Obversion, Contrary), and determine if that single rule is being used correctly or 
illicitly. Derivations of valid arguments can be more complex, though, as it may take a series of 
rules to move from the premise to the conclusion. It takes a creative mind and a healthy 
familiarity wi th all seven  rules  to figure out what “route” might be needed to go from the 
premise to the conclusion. With practice, this becomes somewhat easy.  
 
For the argument above, we might note that the premise is an A statement. We can do 
Contradiction on it to g et a negated O version:  F: Some D are not A. We’ll write that down as the 
second l ine, and justify that move by appealing to Contradiction.  
 
All D are A  /  F: Some non -A are not non -D 
F: Some D are not A  Contradiction  
 
We’ve not derived the conclusion ye t, so we look to see what we might n ext do to change the 
second line  into the conclusion —or at least something that will move us toward  the conclusion.  
Upon reflection, we see that we can do Contraposition on it to get exactly what we want . We 
write F: So me non -A are not non -D as the third line , justifying the  move by appealing to 
Contraposition.  
 
All D are A  /  F: Some non -A are not non -D 
F: Some D are not A    Contradiction  
F: Some non -A are not non -D  Contra position  
 
Now that we’ve derived the conclusi on, we’re done! We’ve shown that if the premise is true, 
then the conclusion must be true, too. The argument is thus valid!  
 
Natural deduction show s valid arguments to be valid , but it cannot  show invalid arguments to be 
invalid (that takes alternative tec hniques). So, what we’ ll deal with here  are valid arguments, and  
we’ll use natural deduction to prove they ’re valid. Here’s another example.  
 
Some horses are mammals. Thus, it is false that no mammals are horses.  
 
Abbreviated and set up as a derivation, th is will look as follows:  
 
Some H are M  /  F: No M are H  
 
113 
 There are a number of changes we need to make to the premise in order to make it look exactly 
like the conclusion. In no specified order, we need to switch the subject and predicate terms, 
change th e quantity from particular to universal, change the quality from affirmative  to negative , 
and change the truth value from true to false. That’s a lot of changes, but oftentimes using one 
rule will make more than one change. Let’s start, though, by using Co nversion on the premise; 
we then get Some M are H . That at l east switches the terms  to match more closely the 
conclusion . 
 
Some H are M  /  F: No M are H  
Some M are H   Conversion  
 
We can make all the other needed changes now by using Contradiction. This gi ves us the 
conclusion, and we’re done!  
 
Some H are M  /  F: No M are H  
Some M are H   Conversion  
F: No M are H   Contradiction  
 
Here are three  more example s. Try to see how the use of each rule gradually  changes the premise 
into the conclusion, thus showing that the premise guarantees that the conclusion is true. We’ll 
assume for the se three  examples that the subject term of each premises refers  to existing things. 
That will allow us to take the existential interpretation, and thus be able to use all seven  
categorical logic rules. If a  premise was about unicorns or vampires (i.e., things that we do not 
wish to assume exist), we’d be limited to the use of Contradiction, Obversion, Conversion, and 
Contraposition.  
 
No P are Q  /  F: No P are non -Q 
All P are non -Q  Obversion  
F: Some P are not non -Q Contradiction  
F: No P are non -Q  Subalternation  
 
F: Some M are N  /  All N are non -M 
No M are N    Contradiction  
No N are M    Conversion  
All N are non -M  Obversion  
 
F: Some non -A are not H  /  Some non -H are A  
F: Some non -H are not A  Contraposition  
All non -H are A   Contradiction  
Some non -H are A   Subalternation  
 
Again, if the premise’s subject term refers to things we do not wish to assume to exist, then we 
are limited to using Contradiction, Obversion, Conversion, and Con traposition. To use another 
rule on a  statement about vampires or mermaids would make us guilty of  the Existential Fallacy. 
Arguments about vampires might still be valid. For example:  
114 
  
All vampires are blood suckers. Thus, it is false that some vampi res are  things other than 
blood suckers.  
 
A derivation of this valid argument can look like this:  
 
All V are B  /  F: Some V are non -B 
F: Some V are not B   Contradiction  
F: Some V are non -B  Obversion  
 
We can’t use this natural deduction technique to show an inval id argument to be invalid, because 
we could not be sure that our inability to derive the conclusion from the premise is due to the 
invalidity of the argument or t o our being somewhat obtuse that  day. The fact that you cannot 
figure out how to get to the co nclusion from the premise using natural deduction does not 
demonstrate anything in particular. The task may be impossible (in which case the argument is 
invalid), or you may simply have not eaten enough Wheaties for breakfast to stimulate your 
brain  adequa tely. If you do succeed in deriving the conclusion from the premise, though, that 
indeed show s the argument to be valid.  
 
**Practice Problems: Categorical Logic and Natural Deduction  
Use natural deduction and any of the seven categorical logic rules to der ive the conclusion of the 
following valid arguments.  Begin by abbreviating the  argument and setting it up in  derivation 
format.  
 
1. No bears are fish. Thus, some things other than fish are not things other than bears.  
2. It is false that all lions are cats . Thus, some lions are things other than cats.  
3. All leprechauns are Irish people. Hence, it is false that some things other than Irish people are 
not things other than leprechauns.  
4. It is false that some animals are bananas. Therefore, it is false that  all things other than animals 
are things other than bananas.  
5. It is false that some anarchists are lovers of law. It follows that some anarchist s are things 
other than lovers of law.  
6. All lesbians are people. Thus, it is false that all people are thin gs other than lesbians.  
7. No Algerians are Bolivians. Thus, it is false that no Algerians are things other than Bolivians.  
8. No mermaids are skinny -dippers. Thus, it is false that some skinny -dippers are not things other 
than mermaids.  
9. All radicals a re enthusiastic people. Hence, some things other than enthusiastic people are 
things other than radicals.  
10. Some Republicans are conservatives. Thus, some conservatives are not things other than 
Republicans.  
 
Answers:  
1.  No B are F  /  Some non -F are no t non -B 
 Some B are not F    Subalternation  
 Some non -F are not non -B  Contraposition  
115 
 2. F: All L are C  /  Some L are non -C 
 F: No L are non -C   Obversion  
 Some L are non -C   Contradiction  
3. All L are I  /  F: Some non -I are not non -L 
 F: Some L are not I    Contradiction  
 F: Some non -I are not non -L  Contraposition  
4.  F: Some A are B//  F: All non -A are non -B 
 F: Some B are A    Conversion  
 F: All B are A     Subalternation  
 F: All non -A are non -B  Contraposition  
5.  F: Some A are L  /  Some A are non -L 
 Some A are not L    Subcontrary  
 Some A are non -L   Obversion  
6. All L are P  /  F: All P are non -L 
 F: No L are P     Contrary  
 F: No P are L     Conversion  
 F: All P are non -L   Obversion  
7. No A are B  /  F: No A are non -B 
 Some A are not B    Subalternation  
 Some A are non -B   Obversion  
 F: No A are non -B   Contradiction  
8. No M are S  /  F: Some S are not non -M 
 No S are M     Conversion  
 F: Some S are M    Contradiction  
 F: Some S are not non -M  Obversion  
9. All R are E  /  Some non -E are non -R 
 All non -E are  non-R   Contraposition  
 Some non -E are non -R  Subalternation  
10. Some R are C  /  Some C are not non -R 
 Some R are not non -C   Obversion  
 Some C are not non -R   Contraposition  
116 
 Chapter 10: Propositional Patterns  
 
The patterns of categorical logic can hand le many arguments, and being familiar with these 
patterns allows us to determine if many arguments are valid or invalid at a glance. Ordinary 
conversation, however, often includes argumentation that in turn includes statements that are a 
bit more complex t han A, E, I, or O statements. As we saw early in the previous chapter, many 
statements can be translated into a standard form categorical pattern, but there remain many 
others that cannot. So, we need to move forward to the next level of deductive reasonin g: the 
patterns of propositional logic . 
 
Whereas categorical statements are made up of terms referring to classes of things (e.g., dogs, 
black cats, unicorns that run through the streets of Bellevue), propositional logic is made up of 
propositions , or decl arative sentences (i.e., statements; that’s why it’s sometimes called 
sentential logic ). Since propositional logic is made up of the kinds of sentences we utter all the 
time, many people find it easier to work with, more natural, and more intuitive than ca tegorical 
logic. It also forms the basis of more advanced deductive logic systems used around the world 
today. An introduction to those systems is presented in Symbolic Logic classes (like PHIL& 120 
at Bellevue College and the University of Washington). We ’ll be getting a non-symbolic  
introduction to propositional logic here.  
 
Basic Statement Patterns  
 
Let’s consider five different kinds of statements, or propositions. Each is used commonly in 
conversation and in arguments. Here are examples of each:  
 
(i) Yogi is a bear. [a simple statement]  
(ii) It is false that Yogi is a bear. [a negation]  
(iii) Yogi is a bear and Boo -Boo is a mammal. [a conjunction]  
(iv) Yogi is a bear or  Boo-Boo is a mammal. [a disjunction]  
(v) If Yogi is a bear, then Boo -Boo is a mammal . [a conditional]  
 
The first we’ll call a simple statement . It does one and only one thing: it declares that something 
is the case. Here, it’s declaring that the classic American cartoon character, Yogi, is a bear. 
Simple statements may be true or false, w e may not know if they’re true or false, or we might 
disagree on whether they’re true or false —but they are true or false, which is what makes these 
sentences statements/propositions  (instead of questions, commands, exclamations, or other non -
declarative s entences).  
 
The remaining four kinds of statements we’ll call compound statements , since they are made  of 
more than one part. The second kind above is made of “It is false that” and a simple statement. 
The third is made of two simple statements and the wor d “and.” The fourth consists of two 
simple statements and the word “or.” And the last is made of two simple statements united with 
“if…then….”  
 
117 
 More specifically, we’ll call the second kind of statement above a negation . A negation merely  
says that a state ment is false. It disagrees with whatever the negating words are  “pointing ” to. 
Anyone growing up watching television cartoons in the U.S. will know that Yogi was a bear in 
Jellystone Park. So we’ll know that “Yogi is a bear” has a truth value of True. “It  is false that 
Yogi is a bear,” or “It is not the case that Yogi is a bear,” or “Yogi is not a bear” denies that Yogi 
is a bear. We’d disagree with that negation, since we agree with the simple statement denied by 
the negating phrases.  
 
This is far easier than any of this sounds. Talking about it makes it appear somewhat convoluted. 
It’s not. Here are some illustrations:  
 
* Oregon is north of California. [We agree! This simple statement is true.]  
* It is false that Oregon is north of California. [We disagre e! This negation is false.]  
* Washington is east of Idaho. [We disagree! This simple statement is false.]  
* It is not the case that Washington is east of Idaho. [We agree! This negation is true.]  
 
The third basic statement pattern above is called a conjunc tion because it conjoins two 
statements. To conjoin two or more statements is to say that they are all true. We agree that Yogi 
is a bear, and we know that Bob -Boo is his short bear friend and longsuffering mammalian 
sidekick. We thus agree that Boo -Boo is  a mammal. Since we agree with both simple statements, 
we’ll agree with a conjunction (an “and” statement) of the two: “Yogi is a bear and Boo-Boo is a 
mammal.”  
 
Would you agree or disagree with the following conjunctions? (Note that in English, there are 
many logically equivalent ways of saying and.) 
 
* Mexico is south of Canada and the Seattle Mariners are a baseball team.  
* Peru is north of Canada, yet the Seattle Mariners are a baseball team.  
* Costa Rica is north of Canada, however  the Seattle Mariners  are a football team.  
* Panama is south of Canada, moreover  the Seattle Mariners are a hockey team.  
* Columbia is south of Iceland, nonetheless the USA is south of Cuba.  
* Honduras is north of Canada, but Belize is south of Argentina.  
 
Conjunctions are tru e if and only if the two statements conjoined are true. The sides of a 
conjunction are called the left conjunct  (or left -hand conjunct) and the right conjunct  (or right -
hand conjunct). So, a conjunction is true just in case  both its conjuncts are true.  
 
For the six conjunctions above, only the first is true, as only with it are both conjuncts true. For 
the others, one or both of the conjuncts is false. This is exactly what we mean when we use the 
basic word “and” in ordinary conversation, so there really is  no weird complication here. As 
logicians, w e’re just trying to be precise.  
 
The third basic kind of statement above is called a disjunction . It’s an “or” statement claiming 
that one or the other of two claims is true. There are two uses of “or” in English : the inclusive 
“or” and the exclusive  “or.” If the disjunction is “Yogi is a bear or Boo -Boo is a mammal” and 
118 
 we mean it in the inclusive sense, then we mean either (a) Yogi is a bear, or (b) Boo -Boo is a 
mammal, or (c) both statements are true. If we mea n it in the exclusive sense, then we mean 
either (a) Yogi is a bear, or (b) Boo -Boo is a mammal, but not both. We exclude the option of 
having them both be true at the sam e time. Think of a friend who  offers a ride in his car to 
school . He approaches you a nd your sister and says, “Either you or your sister can ride with me 
tomorrow.” If he has one seat available, he’s intending you to understand the offer as an 
exclusive “or,” that is, that one or the other —but not both of you —can ride with him tomorrow. 
If he has two seats available, then he likely means the offer as an inclusive “or,” that is, that 
either or both of you can get a ride. For the purposes of this critical thinking class and most 
introductory symbolic logic classes, “or” is understood as inclu sive unless the context makes 
plain that it’s intended to be exclusive.  
 
Disjunctions will then be false only when both disjuncts (right and left, or right -hand and left -
hand) are false. If either side of the “or” is true, then the disjunction as a whole w ill be true. 
Again, this matches exactly the way we’ve been talking since early childhood, so there’s nothing 
bizarre going on here. Which disjunctions below would you agree to and say are true?  
 
* France is in Europe or Chile is in South America.  
* Englan d is in Asia or Argentina is in South America.  
* Canada is in North America or Thailand is in Europe.  
* Australia is in the Atlantic Ocean and Poland is in Central America.  
 
The only disjunction above whose simple statements are both false is the last. Thu s, it’s the only 
one that as a whole is false; the other three statements as wholes are true. Again, a disjunction is 
true if and only if one or more of its disjuncts is true.  
 
The fifth and final kind of statement we’ll consider is called by more than one  name: implication , 
hypothetical , and conditional . We’ll opt for the latter name here, and call “If…, then…” 
statements conditionals . Conditionals have two parts: the “if” part is called the antecedent ; the 
“then” part is called the consequent . The anteced ent (the prefix ante- means “before”) is what 
conceptually comes prior to the consequent (the word is related to “consequently”: following). 
For example, in “If Bellevue is in Washington State, then Bellevue is in the United States,” 
“Bellevue is in Washin gton State” is the conditional’s antecedent, while “Bellevue is in the 
United States” is the statement’s consequent.  
 
Below are some examples of conditional statements:  
 
* If Bob is a baseball player, then Bob plays sports.  
* If Sarah is a physician, then  she is a doctor.  
* If José likes all  seafood, then José likes fish.  
 
There are quite a few ways of saying the same conditional claim in English, which can make 
conditionals the most awkward kinds of statements to work with. English is great for poetry, bu t 
miserable for logic. Note that each of the following examples of conditionals means the same 
thing:  
119 
  
* If it’s raining , then the ground is wet.  
* The ground i s wet, if it’s raining . 
* Provided that it’s raining , the ground is wet.  
* Given that it’s raini ng, the ground is wet.  
* The ground is wet, pr ovided that it’s raining . 
* The ground is wet, given  that it’s raining . 
* It’s raini ng only if the ground is wet. [This one may take some thought, as the “only” throws 
many native English speakers.]  
 
Conditiona ls are clearly the most complicated of the basic kinds of propositional statements. Not 
only are there numerous ways of getting the idea across in English, there is also more than one 
reasonable way of deciding if a conditional is true or false. The latter  problem arises because 
“If…, then…” can mean different things in different contexts. If I say, “If I drop this bowling 
ball on my foot, then my foot would hurt,” I’m using “If…, then…” in a causal sense. Dropping 
bowling balls on my feet causes my feet to  hurt. Knowing that, most of us would say the 
conditional is true. However, if I say, “If I have three coins in my hand, then I have an odd 
number of coins in my hand,” it’s pretty clear I’m saying something different. Having three coins 
does not cause me to have an odd number of coins; it’s a definitional issue and not one of mere 
cause and effect.  
 
There’s a third u se of “If…, then… ” logicians call a material implication . In this sense, the 
conditional statement comes out to be false only when the anteced ent is true and the consequent 
is false. That may not seem intuitive, and that’s likely because we use “If…, then…” in so many 
ways without even thinking about it. But consider the following scenario. I walk up to you one 
morning and make a promise: “If it ’s win dy today, then I’ll fly my kite .” It’s now at the end of 
the day; decide in which situations my promise ends up being false.  
 
(a) It was windy today, and I flew my kite . [No lie there! That’s exactly what I promised to do.]  
 
(b) It was windy t oday, b ut I did not fly my kite . [Here’s the clear falsehood ; I did not do what I 
promised to do.]  
 
(c) It was not windy today, and I did fly kite . [No l ie here! I promised to fly a kite  if it was 
windy, but I might still fly my  specially -designed indoor kites  (there are some, but they’re 
expensive). I’ve certainly not mislead you in any way here.]  
 
(d) It was not windy, and I did not fly an y kite . [No lie here, either.]  
 
The only place where I clearly mislead you was in the second case, the one with a true 
antece dent and false consequent.  
 
Memory device: We can call the situation in which a conditional is false the “T -F situation,” or 
“TUF.” TU F (short for “t ough”) is hard and difficult. TU F is bad. Bad is false. If a conditional is 
120 
 TUF, then it’s false; if it’s not TUF, then it’s true. The following conditionals are thus true given 
the material implication sense of “If…, then…”:  
 
* If George Washington was the first U.S. president, then a man walked on the Moon.  
* If all mothers are female, then all fathers are m ale. 
* If 2+2=5, then squares have four sides.  
* If Ronald Reagan was a U.S. president, then the Mariners play baseball in Seattle.  
* If President Ronald Reagan was an astronaut, then he was a ballet star.  
 
To see that each of these four statements is true , we simply note that none of them ha s a true 
antecedent and false c onsequent. They all avoid the TU F pattern. Now some of them may be 
false given a different interpretation of conditional sta tements, but for the purposes of  this 
chapter, we are going to l imit ourselves to considering only the material implication 
interpretation. Here are some false conditional statements:  
 
* If George Washington was the first U.S. president, then President Ronald Reagan played 
outfield for the Seattle Mariners.  
* If 2+2=4,  then 4+1=6.  
* If Canada is north of Mexico, then the USA is north of Panama.  
* Libya is in the South Pacific, if Egypt is in Africa.  
 
Com plex Statements  
 
Obviously, some compound statements are more complex than these basic patterns. We might, 
for instanc e, have a disjunction made up of two disjuncts, each of which is a compound 
statement. For example:  
 
Either Bob is bald and Tom is tall, or it is false that Susan is short.  
 
The comma helps us out, as its placement near “or” lets us know that this statemen t as a whole is 
a disjunction. The left disjunct (“Bob is bald and Tom is tall”) is a conjunction, while the right 
disjunct (“it is false that Susan is short”) is a negation. We c an abbreviate  this statement as 
“Either B and T, or not -S.” To do so we took each simple statement and replaced it with a 
distinct upper -case letter.  We also abbreviated the negating clause to a simpler “not -.” Consider 
another example:  
 
It is false that if June is jolly then Harry is happy.  
 
The “It is false that” is denying somet hing; in this case it’s denying the conditional statement “if 
June is jolly then Harry is happy.” The statement as a whole is thus a negation; it’s a negated 
conditional. Abbreviated for simplici ty’s sake, this might look like  “Not if J then H.” Let’s look  
at another:  
 
Nathan is not in the Navy and Alice is not in the Army.  
 
121 
 We can abbreviate this as “Not -N and not -A.” It’s a conjunction made up of two negations. The 
left conjunct is a negation negating the simple statement N (“Nathan is in the Navy”). The right 
conjunct is a negation negating the simple statement A (“Alice is in the Army”). Here’s another 
example:  
 
If Alberto is not an artist, then either Daniel is a doctor or it is not the case that Phyllis is a 
physicist.  
 
This can be abbreviated as “If A , then either D or not -P.” Again, the single comma helps, as it 
sits near “then,” which indicates a conditional. The statement as a whole is thus a conditional, 
with a simple statement (A) as its antecedent, and with a disjunction (“either D or not -P”) as its 
consequent. That disjunction, in turn, has a simple statement (D) as its left disjunct and a 
negation (not -P) is its right disjunct. That negation, in turn, is negating a simple statement (P). 
Whew!  
 
What we are doing at this point is getting used to t he structure of some simple and compound 
statements. Once we let that settle into our genetic structure, we’ll more easily be able to 
recognize the validity of some fairly complex deductive arguments.  
 
**Practice Problems: Recognizing Propositional Pattern s 
Determine if each statement below —taken as a whole —is a simple statement, negation, 
conjunction, disjunction, or conditional. Then determine the statement’s truth value (each proper 
name refers to well known places; don’t assume the statement refers to l ittle-known places with 
names similar to better -know n locations).  
 
1. Either Nicaragua is in Central America or Germany is in Europe.  
2. Both France and Paraguay are in Asia.  
3. If Bolivia is in South America, then Tahiti is in the South Pacific.  
4. Greenl and is in the Middle East or Ukraine is in Central America.  
5. It is false that Denmark is in Africa.  
6. Algeria is in North America, but Guatemala is in Central America.  
7. It is false that Brazil is in South America.  
8. China is in Asia.  
9. India is nort h of South Africa or it is false that the USA is south of Canada.  
10. It is false that both Holland and Spain are in Central America.  
11. It is not the case that either Congo or Angola is in Africa.  
12. Russia is larger than Spain, if Japan is smaller than  Mexico.  
13. If it is false that Spain is near Portugal, then Uruguay is in South America.  
14. Either Ecuador and Namibia are in Asia, or Iran is in the Middle East.  
15. Both El Salvador and Venezuela are in the Western Hemisphere, or Turkey is in the West ern 
Hemisphere.  
 
Answers:  
1. Disjunction, true  
2. Conjunction, false  
122 
 3. Conditional, true  
4. Disjunction, false  
5. Negation, true  
6. Conjunction, false  
7. Negation, false  
8. Simple statement, true  
9. Disjunction, true  
10. Negation (i.e., a negated conjunct ion), true  
11. Negation (i.e., a negated disjunction), false  
12. Conditional, true  
13. Conditional, true  
14. Disjunction, true  
15. Disjunction, true  
 
Symbolization  
 
Although we are not covering symbolic logic in Critical Thinking, it may be of interest to some 
students how lo gicians can make our lives easier by abbreviating propositional statements even 
further. Since we are not covering this in Critical Thinking, we’ll look at translating English into 
contemporary symbolic logic very quickly. Feel free to pass over this section, as it will not be 
required for this course. We’ll translate here simple statements, negations, conjunctions, 
disjunctions, and conditionals with symbols, or operators , commonly used by logicians today.  
 
English statement    Translati on into symbolic logic   Operator  
Cats rule.     C 
It is false that cats rule.   ~C      tilde 
Cats rule and dogs drool.   C • D       dot 
Cats rule or dogs drool.   C v D       wedge  
If cats rule, then dogs drool.   C  D      horseshoe  
 
Translation into symbolic  logic makes writing and working with propositional statements much 
easier and quicker. English can be messy, but symbolic logic has a clarity and precision that 
many people enjoy. Consider the following more complex examples, where we use parentheses 
(and brackets and then braces, if needed) to disambiguate the statement’s meaning. If there is a 
need for more than one operator (as below), the main operator is the symbol that tells us what 
kind of statement the statement is as a whole. Thus the main operato r of a negation will be the 
tilde, for a conjunction it’s the dot, for a disjunction it’s the wedge, and for conditionals it’s the 
horseshoe. To be more precise, the main operator has the largest range (or scope ), covering more 
of the statement than any ot her of the statement’s operators.  First, let’s look at some examples of 
symbolic translations:  
 
1. Al and Bob like apples, or Charlie does. (A • B) v C  
2. Al or Bob  like apples, and Charlie does. (A v B) • C  
3. It is false that if Sue likes strawberries t hen Betty likes blueberries. ~(S  B) 
4. If it is false that Sue like strawberries, then Betty likes blueberries. ~S  B 
123 
 5. It is not the case that either Juan or Vic likes oranges. ~(J v V)  
6. Not both June and Kelly like prunes. ~(J • K)  
7. If Gene is no t grand, then Wally is not wonderful. ~G  ~W 
8. If both Lou and Don like pears, then either Sally or Tracy like s apricots. (L • D)  (S v T)  
9. Either Abdul likes artichokes, or if Sasha likes salmon then Tran does not like tuna. A v (S  
~T) 
10. If Naomi  does not like nan, then Petra likes pita and Stu doesn’t like sourdough. ~N  (P • 
~S) 
 
The range consists of that part of the statement that the operator is acting upon (including itself). 
Consider the following statement: ~(N v B)  A 
 
The range of the wedge is underlined here: ~( N v B )  A 
 
The range of the tilde is underlined here: ~(N v B)   A 
 
And here we underline the range of the horseshoe: ~(N v B)  A 
 
The horseshoe’s range includes itself, plus its full antece dent (i.e., ~(N v B) ) and consequent  (i.e., 
A). Since the horseshoe has the largest range, it’s the main operator of the full statement, and that 
makes the statement as a whole a conditional. Once more in life, size matters.  
 
**Practice Problems: Main Operators  
Consider the ten translations above, and determine the main operator for reach.  
 
Answers:  
1. wedge    6. tilde  
2. dot     7. horseshoe  
3. tilde     8. horseshoe  
4. horseshoe    9. wedge  
5. tilde     10. horseshoe  
 
**Practice Problems: Translating into Symbolic Logic  
Translate the following English statements into the language of propositional symbolic logic. 
Use the upper -case letters provided for simple statements.  
 
1. Carl is from Canada and Bob is from Bolivia. (CB)  
2. Paulo is not from Panama or Angie is from Argentina. (PA)  
3. If Frank is from France, then Gerald is German. (FG)  
4. Bart is British, and either Sandy is Spanish or Paula is Portuguese. (BSP)  
5. Arnold is from Angola and Mandy is not from Mali, if Patty is from Paraguay. (AMP)  
6. It is false that either Carlisle is Cuban or Tran is Tahitian, and Parisa is Peruvian. (CTP)  
7. Isaac is from Israel, if it’s the case that both Huy is Hungarian and Adaishewa is not from 
Albania. (IHA)  
8. Tuan is Thai or it is false that Murtaza is Mongolian, or Simeon is not from Sudan. (TMS)  
124 
 9. It is false that both Terrie is not from Togo and Gamani is from Ghana, or Ben is from Benin. 
(TGB)  
10. Julia is Jordanian, if Mark is Malaysian and Inez is not from India. (JMI)  
 
Answers:  
1. C • B     6. ~(C v T) • P  
2. ~P v A     7. ~(H • ~A)  I 
3. F  G    8. (T v ~M) v ~S  
4. B • (S v P)     9. ~ (~T • G) v B  
5. P  (A • ~M)    10. (M • ~I)  J 
 
Valid Argument Patterns  
 
Now that we are familiar with the patterns of some basic propositional statements, we can begin 
to examine propositional argument  patterns. T here are a small number that are so common, they 
have names. Most are wonderfully intuitive and easy to see, but it takes a moment to slow down 
and develop some precision with them. Our goal is to become familiar enough with these 
patterns that we can reco gnize when an argument is valid. We’ll limit ourselves to becoming 
familiar with eight common patterns of valid inference.  
 
Modus Ponens  
 
A simple one is called Modus Ponens , which is Latin for “the Affirming Mode.” It has the 
following pattern  (the three dots aligned in a pyramid is a common way of indicating the 
conclusion of an argument) : 
 
If A, then B  
A 
 B 
 
The order of the two premises does not matter, as the following is Modus Ponens, too:  
 
A 
If A, then B  
 B 
 
It is not really possible to prove that this is a valid inference, as it’s so simple and basic. But it 
confuses no one. If A is true, then B has to be true; and A is true. Thus, B is guaranteed to be 
true. It does not matter what statements A and B stand for; if the premises are true, then the 
conclusion is certain. Of course, one or more of the premises might be false, but that would make 
the valid argument unsound. All we are doing here, though, is recognizing valid arguments to be 
indeed valid.  
 
Here are some examples of Modus Ponens in full E nglish:  
 
125 
 If Ichiro played for the Seattle Mariners, then Ichiro played baseball.  
Ichiro played for the Seattle Mariners.  
Thus, Ichiro played baseball.  
 
Barack Obama is the U.S. president.  
If Barack Obama is the U.S. president, then Barack Obama is a politi cian.  
Therefore, Barack Obama is a politician.  
 
Modus Ponens is a pattern, so technically it can be illustrated using all sorts of things besides 
statements or upper -case letters. For example:  
 
If #, then $   If Ψ, then Φ  If ☺, then ☼   ◊  A  B 
#   Ψ         ☺    If ◊, then □  A 
 $   Φ          ☼    □   B 
 
It’s just a pattern.  
 
Modus Tollens  
 
Another common pattern is called Modus Tollens (Latin: “the denying mode”), and it look s 
somewhat similar to Modus Ponens:  
 
If A, then B  
Not-B 
 Not-A 
 
For Modus To llens, we have a conditional ( If A, then B ), but then state that its consequent ( B) is 
false. From those two claims (the order in which they appear is irrelevant), we may confidently 
conclude that the antecedent ( A) is false. Here are some English instance s of Modus Tollens:  
 
If it’s raining , then the ground is wet.  
The ground is not wet.  
Thus, it’s not raining . 
 
If Hong Kong is in Oregon, then Hong Kong is in the USA.  
But Hong Kong is not in the USA.  
Hence, Hong Kong is not in Oregon.  
 
It is false that Yog i [the cartoon bear] is a fish.  
If Yogi is a salmon, then Yogi is a fish.  
Thus, it is not the case that Yogi is a salmon.  
 
If President Barack Obama pitches for the Seattle Mariners, then he is a baseball player.  
But President Obama is not a baseball playe r. 
Therefore, he does not pitch for the Seattle Mariners.  
126 
  
Technically speaking, the following three valid inferences are not examples of Modus Tollens, as 
they do not precisely match the Modus Tollens pattern:  
 
If A, then not -B  Not-R    If not -O, then no t-Y 
B   If not -D, then R   Y 
 Not-A    D     O 
 
Again, to be picky —and there’s little in life as picky as deductive logic —Modus Tollens makes 
use of two claims: one is a conditional, and the other is the negation of the consequent of that 
conditional; fr om these two we derive the negation of the conditional’s antecedent.  
 
For those who are beginning to like the symbolic approach, Modus Tollens looks like this 
symbolically:  
 
P  Q ~~K   ~A  B  K  ~J 
~Q L  ~K  ~B   ~~J 
 ~P  ~L    ~~A    ~K 
 
Recall that there are two formal fallacies that look like Modus Ponens and Modus Tollens. 
Review the differences here, as two are valid lines of inference, while the other two are invalid 
formal fallacies.  
 
Modus Ponens  ☺  Affirming the Conse quent  ??    Modus Tollens  ☺  Denying the Antecedent  ?? 
If P, then O  If P, then O             If P, then O       If P, then O  
P  O            Not-O       Not-P 
 O   P            Not-P                  Not-O 
 
Disjunctive Syllogism  
 
Disjunctive Syllogism is another common deductive pattern that produces a valid argument. A 
Disjunctive Syllogism is made up of two premises: a disjunction and the negation of one of the 
disjuncts. From those two statements we are guaranteed that the other disjunct is true. For 
instance:  
 
A or B  Either R or Y   Not-K  Not-L or not -Q Not-not-not-M 
Not-A Not-Y   K or W  Not-not-L  H or not -not-M 
 B  R    W   Not-Q   H 
 
English examples include:  
 
* Either Obama is a Republican or he is a Democrat. But he’s not a Republican. Thus, he’s a 
Democrat.  
* Either Lady Gaga is not a singer or she is dancer. But it is false that she is not a singer. Hen ce, 
she is dancer.  
127 
 * I’m going to study for the test. For either I study for the test or I’ll fail the thing, and I don’t 
want to fail the thing.  
 
For those who are interested, Disjunctive Syllogism would look symbolically like this:  
 
P v O   ~I  ~A v ~Q   ~~~~~K  A v (H • M)  
~P  H v I   ~~A   ~~~~K v P  ~A 
 O   H  ~Q    P   H • M  
 
 
Hypothetical Syllogism  
 
Hypothetical Syllogism is a patter n consisting of two premises, bo th of which are conditionals. It 
is required, though, that the two conditionals “match up kitty -corner.” That is, the antecedent of 
one must be exactly the same as the consequent of the other. If so, we can conclude with a third 
conditional. We argue this way all the time. For instance:  
 
If Yogi is a bear, then Yogi is a mammal . 
If Yogi is a  mammal , then Yogi is an animal.  
Thus, if Yogi is a bear, then Yogi is an animal . 
 
Notice how “Yogi is a bear” matches up “kitty -corner” in the premises. The pattern would still 
be Hypothetical Syllogism if the premises are exchanged:  
 
If Yogi is a mammal , then Yogi is a n animal . 
If Yogi is a bear, then Yogi is a mammal . 
Thus, if Yogi is a bear, then Yogi is an  animal.  
 
The following are abbreviated examples of Hypothetical Syllogism:  
 
If J, then L   If not -U, then K   If G, then V    A  B 
If L, then B   If K,  then W    If not -P, then G   B  C 
 If J, then B    If not -U, then W    If not -P, then V    A  C 
 
**Practice Problems: Recognizing Propositional Patterns  
For each abbreviated argument below, determine if it’s a precise example of Modus Ponens, 
Modus Tollens, Disjunctive Syllogism, or Hypo thetical Syllogism. Or is it something else?  
 
1. If E, then K  
    Not-K 
     Not-E 
2. J or Y  
    Not-Y 
     J 
3. If M, then V  
128 
     If V, then J  
     If M, then J  
4. P 
    If P, then D  
     D 
5. If N, then O  
    Not-N 
     Not-O 
6. Not -H 
    H or T  
     T 
7. If not -Q, then K  
    Not-Q 
     K 
8. If A, then X  
    X 
     A 
9. If not -I, then H  
    If not -U, then not -I 
     If not -U, then H  
10. If A, then S  
      If A, then J  
       If S, then J  
 
Answers:  
1.  Modus Tollens  
2. Disjunctive Syllogism  
3. Hyp othetical Syllogism  
4. Modus Ponens  
5. Something else (it’s the invalid formal fallacy Denying the Antecedent)  
6. Disjunctive Syllogism  
7. Modus Ponens  
8. Something else (it’s the invalid formal fallacy Affirming the Consequent)  
9. Hypothetical Syllogism  
10. Something else (it’s an unnamed invalid inference)  
     
Assessing Arguments  
 
Let’s now do something with our knowledge of these four propositional logic patterns. We’re 
going to introduce a technique called natural d eduction . This technique is a way of proving that 
valid arguments are indeed valid. We’ll not look at the full system (you can do that in Symbolic 
Logic, i.e., PHIL& 120), but we’ll get a taste of it here, and focus on the basic sort of 
argumentation we’re likely to run into in ordinary, work aday situations.  
 
129 
 We’ll here work only with valid arguments. We’ll also write them a little differently. Consider 
the following argument:  
 
If Angie is from Albania, then Katie is not from Kenya. Angie is indeed from Albania. Katie is 
from Kenya or Phillip is from the Philippines. It  follows that Phillip is from the Philippines.  
 
We c an abbreviate this argument  as follows, lining the premises up vertically, and placing the 
conclusion to the right of the last premise, after a slash:  
 
1. If A, then not -K 
2. A 
3. K or P / P  
 
In natural d eduction we use valid patterns of logic to deduce, or infer, the conclusion. Recall that 
with valid arguments, the truth of the premises will guarantee that the conclusion is true. So, if 
we can “get” the conclusion from the prem ises, we’ll have shown that the premises guarantee the 
truth of the conclusion, and that the argument is valid.  
 
To do this, we look at the premises and see if we can find any logical move to make. That is, can 
we see the possibility of applying any of the  propositional patterns we have learned so far?  Yes! 
If we focus on lines 1 and 2, we see that they form the Modus Ponens pattern, and they  give us 
Not-K. So let’s write that down, justifying the newly acquired statement by appealing to the lines 
used and the pattern (or “rule”) we used. Just so we don’t have to write down the complete name 
of patter ns, let’s refer to Modus Ponens as MP, to Modus Tollens as MT, to Disjunctive 
Syllogism as DS, and to Hypothetical Syllogism as HS. 
 
1. If A, then not -K 
2. A 
3. K or P / P  
4. Not -K 1, 2 MP  
 
We’ve yet to get the co nclusion , so we’ve yet to prove this argument to be valid. But let’s 
continue. We now have four lines available to us. Do we see another pattern we can use (or an 
additional use of MP)? Yes! We can use l ines 3 and 4 with DS to get P, our conclusion! For 
those who are interested, to the right is the same proof using symbolic logic (it’s not much 
different, just simpler ). 
 
1. If A, then not -K     1. A  ~K 
2. A      2. A 
3. K or P / P       3. K v P / P  
4. Not-K 1, 2 MP     4. ~K   1, 2 MP  
5. P 3, 4 DS     5. P  3, 4 DS  
 
Once we deduce  (or “get”) the conclusion, we’ re done! We have shown that if the premises are 
true, then the conclusion must be true. The argument is therefore valid . 
130 
  
Here’s another example that ’s already abbreviated (with another example of how such a 
deduction would look using symbolic logic):  
 
1. A or D      1. A v D  
2. If A, then M      2. A  M 
3. Not -M / D      3. ~M / D  
4. Not -A 2, 3 MT    4. ~A   2, 3 MT  
5. D 1, 4 DS    5. D  1, 4 DS  
 
We begin here by seeing that lines 3 and 4 fit the Modus Tollens pattern, so we use MT to get 
Not-A. That’s not the conclusion, so we trundle forward. Scanning all four lines at that point, we 
see that lines 1 and 4 fit the Disjunctive Syllogism pattern, so we use DS to get D, which is the 
conclusion. We are then finished, and we’ve shown the argument to be valid.  
 
Here’s one more example.  
 
1. If A, then not -G 
2. If not -G, then K  
3. If K, then either O or B / If A, then either O or B  
4. If A, then K    1, 2 HS  
5. If A, then either O or B  3, 4 HS  
 
We began by seeing that lines 1 and 2 fit the Hypothetical Syllogism pattern to give us line 4: If 
A, then K . We then saw that the consequent of line 4 matched up with the antecedent of line 3, 
providing us another opportunit y to use Hypothetical Syllogism, this time to give us the 
conclusion.  
 
Some deductions (or proofs ) take one or two steps, but others can take much longer. It all 
depends on how complex the argument is and how many patterns we have at our disposal. If we 
learned an infinite number of patterns, each deduction would take only one step. But who wants 
to learn that many patterns? If we learn only a small number of patterns, many of the deductions 
will be quite long and difficult. That doesn’t sound very good, ei ther. So, for our introductory 
purposes, we’ll learn a small number (we’ll examine only four more) and keep the deductions 
reasonably short.  
 
**Practice Problems: Deductions Using the First Four Patterns  
Use the first f our propositional patterns and natura l deduction to prove the following arguments 
to be valid.  
 
1. 1. If A, then if B then C  
  2. B 
 3. A / C  
 
2. 1. D or not -H 
131 
  2. L and K  
 3. If both L and K, then not -D / Not -H 
 
3. 1. If A, then G  
 2. If not -A, then M  
 3. Not -G / M  
 
4. 1. If D, then C  
 2. If it is the case that if D then N, then F  
 3. If C, then N / F  
 
5. 1. Not -Q 
 2. If R, then Q  
 3. If not -R, then if A then Q / Not -A 
 
6. 1. G, or B or M  
 2. Not -B 
 3. If A, then not -G 
 4. A / M  
 
7. 1. If M, then if N then O  
 2. If P, then if O then S  
 3. M  
 4. P / If N, then S  
 
8. 1. If N, then B  
 2. N 
 3. If B, then not -Q 
 4. Q or A / A  
 
9. 1. G or S  
 2. If A, then B or M  
 3. Not -B 
 4. A 
 5. If M, then not -G / S  
 
10. 1. If B, then Q  
 2. Not -A 
 3. Not -Q 
 4. If F, then A  
 5. F, or if not -B then D / D  
 
Answers:  
1. 1. If A, then if B then C  
  2. B 
132 
  3. A / C  
 4. If B, then C   1, 3 MP  
 5. C   2, 4 MP  
 
2. 1. D or not -H 
 2. L and K  
 3. If both L and K, then not -D / Not -H 
 4. Not -D  2, 3 MP  
 5. Not -H  1, 4 DS  
 
3. 1. If A, then G  
 2. If not -A, then M  
 3. Not -G / M  
 4. Not-A  1, 3 MT  
 5. M    2, 4 MP  
 
4. 1. If D, then C  
 2. If it is the case that if D then N, then F  
 3. If C, then N / F  
 4. If D, then N  1, 3 HS  
 5. F   2, 4 MP  
 
5. 1. Not -Q 
 2. If R, then Q  
 3. If not -R, then if A then Q / Not -A 
 4. Not -R  1, 2 MT  
 5. If A , then Q  3, 4 MP  
 6. Not -A  1, 5 MT  
 
6. 1. G, or B or M  
 2. Not -B 
 3. If A, then not -G 
 4. A / M  
 5. Not -G  3, 4 MP  
 6. B or M   1, 5 DS  
 7. M    2, 6 DS  
 
7. 1. If M, then if N then O  
 2. If P, then if O then S  
 3. M  
 4. P / If N, then S  
 5. If N, then O  1, 3 MP  
 6. If O, then S   2, 4 MP  
 7. If N, then S   5, 6 HS  
 
133 
 8. 1. If N, then B  
 2. N 
 3. If B, then not -Q 
 4. Q or A / A  
 5. B   1, 2 MP  
 6. Not -Q  3, 5 MP  
 7. A   4, 6 DS  
 
9. 1. G or S  
 2. If A, then B or M  
 3. Not -B 
 4. A 
 5. If M, then not -G / S  
 6. B or M  2, 4 MP  
 7. M    3, 6 DS  
 8. Not -G  5, 7 MP  
 9. S   1, 8 DS  
 
10. 1. If B, then Q  
 2. Not -A 
 3. Not -Q 
 4. If F, then A  
 5. F, or if not -B then D / D  
 6. Not -B  1, 3 MT  
 7. Not -F  2, 4 MT  
 8. If not -B, then D  5, 7 DS  
 9. D   6, 8 MP  
 
Simplification  
 
We’ll now look at four more propositional patterns. Two are super easy, one is weird, and one is 
a mild pain in the neck. Simplification (abbreviated as Simp ) is one of the easy ones. What 
Simplification says is if a conjunction is true, then each conjunct is tr ue by itself. This is another 
case where talking about it makes it sound more complicated than it is. Here’s what 
Simplification can do:  
 
Mark is a medic and Mark is an athlete. Thus, Mark is a medic.  
 
Or 
 
Mark is a medic and Mark is an athlete. Thus, Mark  is an athlete.  
 
Obviously, if Mark is both a medic and an athlete, then he’s a medic…or an athlete.  
 
134 
 The pattern is so simple that it’s hard to come up with a variety of illustrations of its use. But 
here are some:  
 
A and G  A and G  Not-T and K    Not-R and  either H or E  L, and B and W  
 A  G   Not-T    H or E     B and W  
 
If you have a conjunction, you can think of the two conjuncts as two pieces of ripe fruit  ready to 
be plucked. Simplification makes a somewhat complex conjunction simpler by reducing it  to one 
of its conjuncts. Simplification can now be added to our gr owing list of patterns used in natural 
deduction.  
 
1. A and G      1. N or J  
2. If A, then G / G     2. Not -N and G  
3. A  1 Simp    3. If J, then Q / Q  
4. G  2, 3 MP   4. Not -N  2 Simp  
     5. J   1, 4 DS  
     6. Q   3, 5 MP  
 
Conjunction  
 
Conjunction is another easy pattern to recognize. Conjunction ( Conj for short) says that if you 
know any two statements to be true, then they are both true. That may seem way too obvious, but 
it’s an important pattern in logic. Here’s how it can work:  
 
* Canada is north of the USA. The USA is north of Mexico. Thus, Canada is north of the USA , 
and the USA is north of Mexico.  
* Theresa is tall. Theresa is a logician. T hus, Theresa is  tall and Theresa is a logician . 
* Theresa is tall. Theresa is a logician. Thus, Theresa is a logician and Theresa is tall.  
 
We might abbreviate the  second argument above this way:  
 
T 
L 
 T and L  
 
The individual statements can be simple or compound (with a complex symbolic example 
thrown in for those relishing such things):  
 
K or B    If J, then Y     A • (B v ~O)  
If G, then B    If not -P, then D    ~H  L 
 K or B, and if G then B   If J the n Y, and if not -P then D   [A • (B v ~O)] • (~H  L) 
 
Here are two natural deduction proofs using Conjunction:  
 
1. If both A and B, then C    1. K and G  
135 
 2. A     2. Not -L and E / K and not -L 
3. B / B and C      3. K   1 Simp  
4. A and B   2, 3 Conj   4. Not -L  2 Simp  
5. C  1, 4 MP   5. K and not -L  3, 4 Conj  
6. B and C   3, 5 Conj  
 
Addition  
 
This pattern may feel like cheating. Addition allows you to take any complete statement, and add 
any other statement to it to make a disjunction . Examples include:  
 
A G      U  If P, then N    Not-Y  
 A or B   G or not -G      U or U   If P then N, or not -J Not-Y or E   
 
In English, this might look like this:  
 
Dogs are animals. Thus, dogs are animals or whales fly though the air with pink wings.  
 
As long as the first statement is true (and it is here ), then it really does not matter what statement 
(true or false) we add to it; the disjunction as a whole will be true.  
 
Here are examples of using Addition ( Add for short) in natural d eduction.  
 
1. K     1. If A, then B  
2. If either K or G, then P / P    2. A / B or W  
3. K or G   1 Add    3. B   1, 2 MP  
4. P  2, 3 MP   4. B or W   3 Add  
 
1. Not -J     1. ~K • Z  
2. If either not -J or not -M, then Q   2. (~K v R)  ~O  
3. If Q, then P / P, or both Y and E   3. O v (K v H) / (H v I) v ~P  
4. Not -J or not -M  1 Add   4. ~K   1 Simp  
5. Q   2, 4 MP  5. ~K v R   4 Add  
6. P   3, 5 MP  6. ~O    2, 5 MT  
7. P, or both Y and E   6 Add   7. K v H   3, 6 DS  
     8. H   4, 7 DS  
     9. H v I   8 Add  
     10. (H v I) v ~P  9 Add      
 
Constructive Dilemma  
 
Well, one had to be the worst, and her e it may be: Constructive Dilemma  (CD for short). This 
pattern appeals to three  statements to make an inference. Two are conditionals, and one is a 
disjunction made up of the antecedents of the two conditionals. What we can infer from this 
mess is another disjunction made up of the consequents of the two conditionals. Maybe looking 
136 
 at some abbreviated examples will make more sense than verbally trying to describe it (the order 
of the three premises is irrelevant, of course). Let’s also give those growing nu mber of symbolic 
logic fans a peek  at how Constructive Dilemma can look.  
 
If P, then Q   Not-L or G    P  Q 
If R, then S   If not -L, then D   R  S 
P or R   If G, then not -K  P v R  
 Q or S   D or not -K    Q v S  
 
Perhaps two English examples might help?  
 
If I eat go od food, then I’ll be healthy.  If Joe studies tonight, then he’ll pass the test.  
If I eat junk food, I’ll be unhealthy.   If Joe plays games tonight, then he’ll have fun.  
Either I’ ll eat good food or junk food.  Joe is either going to study or play games tonight.  
Thus, I’ll e ither be healthy or unhealthy.  Thus, Joe will either pass the test or have fun.  
 
Here’s how Construct ive Dilemma might show up in a natural d eduction proof:  
 
1. If K then Y, and if J then B    1. If M, then B  
2. K or J / Y or B     2. M or H  
3. If K, then Y   1 Simp    3. If H, then Q  
4. If J, then B   1 Simp    4. If B or Q, then A and E / E or W  
5. Y or B   2, 3, 4 CD   5. B or Q   1, 2, 3 CD  
     6. A and E   4, 5 MP  
     7. E   6 Simp  
     8. E or W   7 Add  
 
**Practice Problems: Natural Deduction  
Use the ei ght propositional patterns and natural d eduction to prove that each of the following 
arguments is valid. [We’ll give the last beefy problem to those who have embraced th e optional 
joys of symbolic logic.]  
 
1.  1. Not -Z, and either H or W  
 2. If H, then Y  
 3. If W, then Z / Y or Z  
 
2. 1. A and not -P 
 2. B and J / A and J  
 
3.  1. L and Q  
 2. K and not -W 
 3. If both Q and K, then D / D  
 
4. 1. If M then B, and P  
 2. If S, the n I 
137 
  3. S or M / I or P  
 
5. 1. A 
 2. If either A or B, then  S / S  
 
6. 1. Not -G 
 2. G or not -D 
 3. If F, then D / Not -F 
 
7. 1. T, and M or S  
 2. If T, then not -M / T and S 
 
8. 1. If not -A, then  B 
 2. Not -A or D 
 3. If D, then H / B or H, or not -M 
 
9. 1. Not -B 
 2. H 
 3. If both not -B and H, then either B or N / N  
 
10. 1. If A, then  G 
 2. If it’s the case that if A then not -R, then it’s the case that if F then G  
 3. If G, then not -R / If F, then not -R 
 
11. 1. If B then G, and  F 
 2. M and S, and if A then D  
 3. B or A / G or  D 
 
12. 1. E and F 
 2. S 
 3. If both S and F, then  H / H or not -F 
 
13. 1. If L, then  J 
 2. Not -J 
 3. L or  O 
 4. If O, then either J or M / M and not-J, or J 
 
14. 1. It is false that either A or B  
 2. A / Z  
 
15. 1. A 
 2. S 
 3. If both A and S,  then P / P and S 
 
16. 1. Not -D and R 
138 
  2. D or  L 
 3. If L, then S / S and R,  or not-L 
 
17. 1. If G, then  H 
 2. Not -H and M 
 3. If both not -G and M, then either H or P / P 
 
18. 1. If R then S, and if S then not -D 
 2. If it’s the case that if R then not -D, then R 
 3. D, or if S then M  / If R then M, or if  M then R  
 
19. 1. A and not-C 
 2. If A, then C or not-D 
 3. If F, then D / Not -F or not -A, and A 
 
20. 1. Not -A and not -I 
 2. If not -Q, then A  
 3. If not -A, then X  
 4. If both X and not -not-Q, then K / K and n ot-I 
 
21. 1. (R • P)  (Q v I)  
 2. (~Q v A) R 
 3. (~Q v J)  P 
 4. ~Q • N / [I • (~Q v A)] v (P  I) 
 
Answers:  
1.  1. Not -Z, and H or W  
 2. If H, then Y  
 3. If W, then Z / Y or Z  
 4. H or W   1 Simp  
 5.  Y or Z   2, 3, 4 CD  
 
2. 1. A and not -P 
 2. B and J / A and J  
 3. A  1 Simp  
 4. J  2 Simp  
 5. A and J  3, 4 Conj  
 
3.  1. L and Q  
 2. K and not -W 
 3. If both Q and K, then D / D  
 4. Q  1 Simp  
 5. K  2 Simp  
 6. Q and K  4, 5 Conj  
 7. D  3, 6 MP  
139 
  
4. 1. If M then B, and P  
 2. If S, then I  
 3. S or M / I or B  
 4. If M, then B   1 Simp  
 5. I or P   2, 3, 4 CD  
 
5. 1. A 
 2. If either A or B, then  S / S  
 3. A or B   1 Add  
 4. S   2, 3 MP  
 
6. 1. Not -G 
 2. G or not -D 
 3. If F, then D / Not -F 
 4. Not -D  1, 2 DS  
 5. Not -F  3, 4 MT  
 
7. 1. T, and M or S  
 2. If T, then not -M / T and S 
 3. T   1 Simp  
 4. M or S   1 Simp  
 5. Not -M  2, 3 MP  
 6. S   4, 5 DS  
 7. T and S   3, 6 Conj  
 
8. 1. If not -A, then  B 
 2. Not -A or D 
 3. If D, then H / B or H, or not -M 
 4. B or H   1, 2, 3 CD  
 5. B or H, or not -M 4 Add  
 
9. 1. Not -B 
 2. H 
 3. If both not -B and H, then either B or N / N  
 4. Not -B and H  1, 2 Conj  
 5. B or N   3, 4 MP  
 6. N   1, 5 DS  
 
10. 1. If A, then  G 
 2. If it’s the case that if A then not -R, then it’s the case that if F then G  
 3. If G, then not -R / If F, then not -R 
 4. If A, then not -R  1, 3 HS  
 5. If F, then G    2, 4 MP  
 6. If F, then not -R  3, 5 HS  
140 
  
11. 1. If B then G, and  F 
 2. M and S, and if A then D  
 3. B or A / G or  D 
 4. If B, then G   1 Simp  
 5. If A, then D   2 Simp  
 6. G or D   3, 4, 5 CD  
 
12. 1. E and F 
 2. S 
 3. If both S and F , then  H / H or not -F 
 4. F   1 Simp  
 5. S and F   2, 4 Conj  
 6. H   3, 5 MP  
 7. H or not -F  6 Add  
 
13. 1. If L, then  J 
 2. Not -J 
 3. L or  O 
 4. If O, then either J or M / M and not-J, or J 
 5. Not -L  1, 2 MT  
 6. O   3, 5 DS  
 7. J or M   4, 6 MP  
 8. M    2, 7 DS 
 9. M and not -J  2, 8 Conj  
 10. M and not -J, or J  9 Add  
 
14. 1. It is false that either A or B  
 2. A / Z  
 3. A or B   2 Add  
 4. A or B, or Z   3 Add  
 5. Z   1, 4 DS  
 
15. 1. A 
 2. S 
 3. If both A and S, then  P / P and S 
 4. A and S   1, 2 Conj  
 5. P   3, 4 MP 
 6. P and S   2, 5 Conj  
 
16. 1. Not -D and R 
 2. D or  L 
 3. If L, then S / S and R,  or not-L 
 4. Not -D  1 Simp  
 5. L   2, 4 DS  
141 
  6. S   3, 5 MP  
 7. R   1 Simp  
 8. S and R   6, 7 Conj  
 9. S and R, or not -L 8 Add  
 
17. 1. If G, then  H 
 2. Not -H and M 
 3. If both not -G and M, then either H or P / P 
 4. Not -H  2 Simp  
 5. Not -G  1, 4 MT  
 6. M    2 Simp  
 7. Not -G and M  5, 6 Conj  
 8. H or P   3, 7 MP  
 9. P   4, 8 DS  
 
18. 1. If R then S, and if S then not -D 
 2. If it’s the case that if R then not -D, then  R 
 3. D, or i f S then M  / If R then M, or if  M then R  
 4. If R, then S     1 Simp  
 5. If S, then not -D   1 Simp  
 6. If R, then not -D   4, 5 HS  
 7. R     2, 6 MP  
 8. Not -D    6, 7 MP  
 9. If S, then M     3, 8 DS  
 10. If R, then M    4, 9 HS  
 11. If R then M, or if  M then R  10 Add  
 
19. 1. A and not-C 
 2. If A, then C or not-D 
 3. If F, then D / Not -F or not -A, and A 
 4. A    1 Simp  
 5. C or not -D   2, 4 MP  
 6. Not -C   1 Simp  
 7. Not -D   5, 6 DS  
 8. Not -F   3, 7 MT  
 9. Not -F or not -A  8 Add  
 10. Not -F or not -A, and A 4, 9 Con j 
 
20. 1. Not -A and not -I 
 2. If not -Q, then A  
 3. If not -A, then X  
 4. If both X and not -not-Q, then K / K and not -I 
 5. Not -A   1 Simp  
 6. X    3, 5 MP  
 7. Not -not-Q   2, 5 MT  
142 
  8. X and not -not-Q  6, 7 Conj  
 9. K    4, 8 MP  
 10. Not -I   1 Simp  
 11. K and  not-I  9, 10 Conj  
 
21. 1. (R • P)  (Q v I)  
 2. (~Q v A) R 
 3. (~Q v J)  P 
 4. ~Q • N / [I • (~Q v A)] v (P  I) 
 5. ~Q     4 Simp  
 6. ~Q v A    5 Add  
 7. ~Q v J    5 Add  
 8. R    2, 6 MP  
 9. P    3, 7 MP  
 10. R • P    8, 9 Conj  
 11. Q v I    1, 10 MP  
 12. I    5, 11 DS  
 13. I • (~Q v A)   6, 12 Conj  
 14. [I • (~Q v A)] v (P  I) 13 Add  
 
143 
 Chapter 11: Causal Arguments  
 
We have looked briefly at causal arguments twice in this text. We first met them as a pattern of 
inductive argumentation. Secondly, we saw them in False Cause and Slippery Slope informal 
fallacies. Now it’s time to look at causal argumentation more closely, and to see how one might 
reason well in drawing a conclusion about the cause of an event.  
Necessary and Sufficient Causes  
First, we need to be  aware of some different kinds of spatio -temporal causation. Philosophers 
and scientists often appeal to two kinds of causes in particular: necessary and sufficient. A 
necessary cause is a state of affairs that is needed for another state of affairs to tak e place. 
Without the necessary cause, the second event will not take place. For instance, oxygen is 
necessary (i.e., needed) for a match to catch fire, but it  is not sufficient . The match can be 
surrounded by oxygen, but still not catch fire. However, the match needs oxygen to catch fire. 
Other examples of necessary causes include the following:  
 
* Water is a necessary cause of plant health.  
* Force is needed for a coiled spring to be lengthen ed. 
* Paint is needed for an artist to paint a portrait.  
* Labore rs are needed for farm crops to be harvested.  
* Fertilization is necessary for pregnancy to occur.  
* People need air to live.  
* Having power will cause a radio to play.  
 
A sufficient cause is a state of affairs that is enough for another state of affairs t o take place. 
There may be more than one factor that can cause an event to take place, but a sufficient cause is 
one of them. If a man is thirsty, water is usually enough to quench his thirst. He does not need 
water, as other liquids might do the job. Wate r is thus a sufficient —but not a necessary —cause 
for quenching a man’s thirst. Other examples of sufficient causes include:  
 
* Placing a loaf of bread in one’s home freezer will cause that loaf of bread to freeze.  
* Heating a pot of broth on a very hot sto ve is sufficient to boil the broth.  
* Exercising more and eating less is enough to lose weight.  
* Breaking a leg playing football is enough to make someone injured.  
* Eating cheesecake will give most logic instructors pleasure.  
* Having a billion dollars c auses a person to be financially rich.  
* Dropping a radio from a high -flying airplane will cause the radio to break.  
* Lack of gasoline is a sufficient cause of a car not running.  
 
If a causal relation is claimed —as in “C causes E” —then ask if C is needed  or merely enough  for 
E to take place. If the former, then C is a necessary cause of E; if the latter, then C is a sufficient 
cause of E.  
 
144 
 Some causes are both necessary and sufficient for something to obtain  (that is, to be the case as 
an event, occurrenc e, or state of affairs ). For example, a logic instructor might say, “Our only 
course assignments are three tests. To get an A in this course, you will need to get an A on those 
three tests. Moreover, getting an A on those three test s is enough to guarantee  that you ’d get an 
A in the course, regardless of what else you may or may not do here. ” This instructor is outlining 
the necessary and sufficient causes for getting an A in his class. G etting As on all three tests is —
he claims —both needed and enough to ge t an A for the course.  
 
The topic of causality can be vastly complex, and philosophers, scientists, doctors, and others are 
still looking into it. A paleontologist may want to know what caused a dinosaur to die; an 
epidemiologist may want to know what is c ausing a skin irritation; a sociologist may want to 
know what causes a culture to adopt a ritual; an environmental activist may want to know how 
best to cause people to use automobiles less. Some of this discussion hinges on what we mean by 
cause . Necessar y and sufficient causes are often relevant, but a full discussion can hardly stop 
there. Contributory causes may be neither necessary nor sufficient, but causally relevant to a 
state of affairs obtaining.  For instance, eating leafy greens —nutritionists te ll us—in some sense 
causes bodily health. Yet leafy greens are not necessary  for such health (there are people in the 
world who are healthy but who have no or little access to leafy greens), nor are they sufficient  
(you can have all the leafy greens imagin able, but still be unhealthy because you lack other 
important foods).  
 
Australian philosopher J. L. Mackie (1917 –1981) provides a more complex analysis of 
causation . In The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation (Oxford: Oxford Un iversity 
Press, 198 0) he  refers to  INUS conditions . Mackie argues that w hat most of us have referred to as 
necessary or  sufficient causes are often  a combination, or plurality , of causes. An effect, he 
holds, can be produced by a variety of distinct groups of factors. Each g roup is sufficient to 
cause the effect, but no particular group is itself necessary to do so.  
 
Normal events like a house catching fire, the initiation of a street riot, the learning of a new 
language, or the hitting of a baseball with a bat involve comple x causal relations . An eve nt E is 
caused not by one specific  event A, but more likely by a group of c onjoined events A+B+C+D. 
But, Mackie  continues, E might also have been  caused by a different set of conjoined causal 
factors: G+H+I or H+A+K+L. One can be guilty of the informal fallacy of False Cause if one  
“oversimplifies” a complex causal relationship  issue by saying that E was caused by one specific 
causal factor (e.g., A).  
 
Mackie refers to each individual factor of any group of causal factors as an INUS condition  for E . 
The acronym refers to his description of  an INUS condition as an insufficient  but nonredundant  
part of an unnecessary  but sufficient  condition for E. He illustrates his meaning with  a house fire 
caused (in part) by a short circuit. The s hort circuit is insufficient  by itself, since it alone would 
not have started the fire. The short circuit was nonredundant  (or needed) in the group of causal 
factors, however, as without it, the other factors would not have been enough to initiate the fire . 
The set of factors that includes the short circuit is  together  sufficient  to start the fire, but 
unnecessary , as some other group of factors (e.g., ones involving lightning or an arsonist) could 
account  for the blaze.  
145 
  
Classes in Metaphysics (the philoso phical study of the ultimate nature of reality) and Philosophy 
of Science are  probably the best place s to tackle the intricate field of causation fully. For our 
purposes here, we’ll limit our inquiry to necessary and sufficient causes.  
 
**Practice Problems : Necessary and Sufficient Causes  
Are the following causes necessary only, sufficient only, both necessary and sufficient, or neither 
necessary nor sufficient for the state of affairs noted to obtain? Imagine ordinary circumstances 
for each case.  
 
1. A lar ge rock thrown through a window causes the window to break.  
2. Diesel fuel causes Bob’s diesel truck to run.  
3. Hitting someone’s leg with a small marshmallow causes her leg to be injured.  
4. Getting the stomach flu causes one to feel poorly.  
5. A rise in  temperature will cause the mercury to rise in a thermometer.  
6. Covering a campfire with dirt will cause it to go out.  
7. Natural or artificial sunlight will cause photosynthesis to take place in plants.  
8. Placing blue litmus paper in acid will cause the  paper to turn red.  
9. An ordinary lamp must have a bulb for the light to shine.  
10. Eating five large hamburgers will cause a hungry person to feel full.  
 
Answers:  
1. Sufficient only     6. Sufficient only  
2. Necessary only     7. Necessary only  
3. Neither necessary nor sufficient   8. Both necessary and sufficient  
4. Sufficient only     9. Necessary only  
5. Both necessary and sufficient   10. Sufficient only  
 
Mill’s Methods  
 
John Stuart Mill (1806 -1873) was an important British philosopher famous for his books  
Utilitarianism (1861; read in many college Ethics classes) and On Liberty (1859; read in many 
Social Philosophy classes). He also wrote a book on logic: System of Logic, Ratiocinative and 
Inductive (1843; rarely read in logic classes today ). The part of t his logic book that logicians 
continue to draw upon is Mill’s discussion of causal arguments. Although Mill’s analysis has 
been improved upon, most logic and critical thinking textbooks produced today give credit to 
Mill by presenting “Mill’s Methods.” Those “methods” are five ways by  which we can argue that 
C is a cause of E.  
 
As it turns out, Mill did not really discover anything; ordinary people like your auto mechanic 
and doctor use these lines of reasoning all the time to try to determine the cause of  your engine 
or stomach trouble. Most of this will seem like perfectly common sense, and it is. We’ll just be 
making our reasoning about causation a little more precise.  
 
Method of Agreement  
146 
  
Imagine that five students leave the school cafeteria one day, an d all immediately begin to get 
physically, grossly sick, seemingly from something they ate. Given the high quality and social 
consciousness of the food offered at our cafeteria, this may be hard to imagine, but give it a try 
nonetheless. You are a doctor a ssigned to determine the likely cause of the public malady. A 
janitor is  waiting in the wings, mop and pail in hand, to see if additional students become ill. 
What would you do?  
 
The first and obvious response is to ask each of the five students what he or  she had just eaten. 
You are hoping that there is a food item they each ate. Let’s imagine this is what you found out:  
 
Al ate potato chips and f rench fries.  
Barbara ate f rench fries, a taco, and a donut.  
Charlie ate pizza, a corn dog, and stole som e of Ba rbara’s f rench fries.  
Debbie mixed her f rench fries in a side of gravy.  
Ellen is a vegetarian and ate only f rench fries, a donut, and potato chips.  
 
What is the likely cause of the illness? French fries! Why? Because it is the one food that all five 
studen ts ate, or agreed  upon. It is the one factor in agreement among all the various foods they 
ate that woeful afternoon. It’s not, of cour se, guaranteed that it was the f rench fries that caused 
the illness (it might have been the plates the fries were served on), but this is inductive reasoning, 
and guaranteed conclusions are not expected. Still, the fries are the likely suspect, and further 
inquiry or testing should be directed their way.  
 
We can create a table to visually show the data collected. Place the v arious cases to the left of the 
table, and on top of the table place the various possible causes of the phenomenon in question 
(i.e., the illness). At the top right we’ll note the phenomenon in question. For convention’s sake, 
we’ll use an x for when t he cause obtains, and a dash  for when it does not.  
 
 Potato 
chips  French 
fries Taco  Donut  Pizza  Corn 
dog Gravy  Became 
ill 
Al x x - - - - - x 
Barbara  - x x x - - - x 
Charlie  - x - - x x x x 
Debbie  - x - - - - x x 
Ellen  x x - x - - - x 
 
It is only t he french fries column that agrees perfectly with the column under the phenomenon in 
question. It’s possible that Al had an allergic reaction to the potato chips he ate, and each of the 
others responded individually and uniquely to some food or combination of foo ds they ingested, 
but the likely cause of the group’s illness was the one thing they all ate in common: the fries. It 
147 
 looks like, moreover, that eating the fries was needed  for them to get sick. Donuts were not 
needed , for instance, because Al, Debbie, and  Charlie got sick without eating them. French  fries 
were thus  likely a necessary cause for these five students becoming ill in this manner this day. 
We can go so far as to say that if the Method of Agreement gives clear results, it can point to a 
necessary  (but not sufficient) cause of an event.  
 
The Method of Agreement works particularly well in hindsight, or retrospectively. If we have a 
group of events and want to know their cause, we can go back, so to speak, and try to determine  
what causes obtained fo r each of them. The Method of Agreement works better if there are more 
examples of things experiencing the p henomenon in question. So, if  ten students go t sick this 
woe begotten day, and all ten ate f rench fries, then we’d have stronger reason to believe i t was 
indeed the fries that caused the illness. If we had only two students who became ill, and fries 
were the only thing they both had eaten, we could still conclude it was probably the fries that 
were the problem, but the argument would be weaker. Ideall y, we’ll have at least three cases to 
compare —with more being better —when appealing to the Method of Agreement. Anything less 
than three will make for a fairly weak inference; it would not be enough for us to see a solid 
pattern.  
 
Method of Difference  
 
Another line of causal reasoning is called the Method of D ifference . Whereas the Method of 
Agreement is usually retrospective (i.e., looking back for a cause of an effect that already took 
place), the Method of Difference is usually forward looking and more c ontrolled. In the Method 
of Difference, we take two things and make sure they are exactly the same in all relevant 
respects, except for one key difference. If one thing experiences the phenomenon in question and 
the other doesn’t, then that one key differe nce is likely the cause of the phenomenon.  
 
For instance, let’s say you want to determine whether Kwik -Gro fertilizer stimulates plant 
growth. We might take two plants of the same variety, age, and health, and place them in similar 
pots, using similar soil . We give them exactly the same amount of sunlight, air circulation, and 
water. Everything is controlled to be the same, except we feed Plant A with Kwik -Gro, but do 
not give the amendment to Plant B. If Plant A grows significantly more vigorously than Pla nt B, 
we are justified in concluding that Kwik -Gro fertilizer is the cause of the extra growth.  
 
Note that we can do this test in parallel, taking 200 similar plants and treating them all exactly 
the same, except we give Kwik -Gro to 100 plants but not to t he others. This is using the Method 
of Difference in a 100 -pair series. Such duplication of the method helps avoid unexpected 
differences in the plants, soils, water, air, or other factors. If 90 percent of the plants treated with 
Kwik -Gro showed substanti al increase in growth, and none of those not treated with Kwik -Gro 
did, then we could say that there was approximately a 90 percent chance that Kwik -Gro will 
assist growth. Testing with more pairs of plants or finding a higher percentage in the results wil l 
make our conclusion stronger.  
 
The Method of Difference works well on inanimate objects and plants, but is morally 
problematic when used on sentient animals; it’s even more problematic when used on humans. 
148 
 Humans are highly complex creatures, and no two are close to being exactly alike. Rats from the 
same parents, houseflies, and other simpler critters can be enough alike so that we can readily 
limit t he test to one controlled difference in an experiment. Humans are too complex, and 
additional differences  become apparent and undercut the conclusion that the one intended 
difference is the cause of the phenomenon in question. Also, it is often immoral to control 
humans to such an extent that only one difference is allowed. It would take caging a pair of 
huma ns and forcing upon them the same food, water, air, social companionship, freedom, 
rational discourse, etcetera to attempt the use of Method of Difference. The Nazis did this with 
unwilling humans, and the world still refuses to make use of the findings.  
 
We can set up a chart for the Method of Difference:  
 
 1 pint 
tap  
water / 
day Southern 
exposure 
to sun  Soil 
X Kwik -
Gro Variety 
of plant  1 
week 
old at 
start Healthy 
at start  Constant 
air 
circulatio
n Extra 
growth  
Plant 
A x x x x x x x x x 
Plant 
B x x x - x x x x - 
 
This chart shows that the two plants were the same —as best as we could determine —in all 
relevant ways except that one received Kwik -Gro and the other did not. The one that received 
Kwik -Gro experienced extra growth; the other did not. Since Kwik -Gro was the only known 
relevant difference, we can conclude that it likely is the direct cause of the extra growth.  
 
The results of the Method of Difference can be the inverse of this, though. Instead of the one 
subject that has the difference experiencin g the phenomenon in question, it could be that the 
subject failing to  have the differing trait experiences the phenomenon in question. For instance, 
suppose that two people ( we can use people if we take moral considerations seriously) with 
similar tendenci es for headaches are —as far as we can tell —the same in every relevant respect, 
except that for t wo weeks we give one daily doses  of pain reliever Z. As it turns out, the person 
who takes Z does not get headaches over this time period, while the other perso n does get the 
regular headaches. Since pain reliever Z was the only known relevant difference, we can 
conclude that taking Z helps people from getting (at least those kinds of) headaches.  
 
 Food  Drink  Exercise  Social 
life Work 
pressure  Relaxation 
and 
recreation  Pain 
reliever 
Z Headaches  
Subject 
A x x x x x x x - 
149 
 Subject 
B x x x x x x - x 
 
Here the Method of Difference is working in an inverse manner, but it shows what is enough to 
prevent headaches. We can also note that pain reliever Z may not be neces sary to stop 
headaches; pain reliever Y or a good neck massage might work well, too. Still, Z appears to be 
sufficient to do the job. So, to speak more generally, the Method of Difference —when the results 
are clear —can provide a sufficient  cause for a phen omenon in question.  
 
Thus, the Method of Difference differs from the Method of Agreement in a variety of ways. The 
Method of Agreement looks backwards at what already happened, and tries to discover the cause 
of that event. The Method of Difference is usua lly looking forward at what will cause a specified 
phenomenon. The Method of Agreement works best appealing to three or more cases, while the 
Method of Difference works with two (or a multiple series of two). The Method of Agreement is 
often not controlled  (since it is usually retrospective), while the Method of Difference is almost 
always highly controlled to ensure only one relevant difference. Finally, the Method of 
Agreement —if the results are clear —can point to a necessary cause, while the Method of 
Difference —if the results are clear —can point to a sufficient cause.  
 
Joint Method  
 
The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference —or more simply, the Joint Method —looks to be 
a bit like a combination of the Method of Agreement and the Method of Difference. It ’s a 
broader ranging line of reasoning than either by itself, but it might be better understood as an 
expansion on the Method of Agreement. Whereas the Method of Agreement looks at a group of 
events (or individuals, or states of affairs) that exhibit some specific phenomenon (e.g., five 
students getting sick from eating food in the school cafeteria), the Joint Method takes into 
consideration both those who exhibit the phenomenon and those who don’t (or at least multiple 
instances of each). Consider the foll owing dining fiasco:  
 
Andy, Bella, Chikka, David, Ellen, Fred entered the Chunk -O-Cheese Pizzeria together in 
seemingly fine health, and ate dinner there. Soon afterwards, Bella, David, and Ellen became 
quite ill, apparently from something they ate. Andy h ad taken Critical Thinking at Bellevue 
College, so he knew to ask what each had eaten. He even drew up a table showing the 
information he collected:  
 
 Spaghetti  Cheese 
pizza  Pepperoni 
pizza  House 
salad w/ 
ranch 
dressing  House 
salad w/ 
Italian 
dressing  Got sick 
Andy  x x x - x - 
Bella  - - - x - x 
150 
 Chikka  x - - - x - 
David  x x - x - x 
Ellen  - x - x x x 
Fred x - x - x - 
 
What is the likely cause of the illness? The ranch dressing! Everyone who got sick ate the ranch 
dressing, and no one who did not get si ck ate it. It appears —we can conclude inductively —that 
the ranch dressing was enough  to make Bella, David, and Ellen sick (because anyone who ate it 
got sick), and it was also (among the foods they ate) needed  to make them sick (because nothing 
else seemed  to make anyone sick). Thus —speaking more generally —the Joint Method can point 
to a necessary and sufficient cause of a specified phenomenon when the results are clear. That is, 
if the occurrence of the phenomenon agrees perfectly with the occurrence of a specific causal 
factor, then the method can provide a necessary cause. If the lack of occurrence of the 
phenomenon matches up with a lack of occurrence of the same  causal factor, then the Joint 
Method can provide a sufficient cause.  
 
The Joint Method as us ed here cannot prove deductively that the ranch dressing is the culprit, for 
it may be that each of the three ailing diners has a unique disposition toward various foods, and it 
was just dumb luck that they each ate something that did not sit well with him  or her. Still, given 
the information we now have, the restaurant manager has good reason to take a careful look at 
the ranch dressing. If she had little by way of moral scruples, she might give samples to a variety 
of other customers, and refuse to serve it to a variety of others. If all those who eat it get sick, 
and none of the others do, she’d be using the Joint Method further to provide added evidence for 
the ranch dressing’s gastrointestinal turpitude.  
 
If the restaurant manager was an inquisitive mor al monster, she might kidnap two people of 
similar genetic structure and heritage, confine them in similar cages, provide them the same 
water, food, air, light, and other bodily needs, and force only one to ingest a house -salad portion 
of ranch dressing. H ere she’s using the Method of Difference to help confirm the conclusion 
derived from use of the Joint Method. If the dressing -eater gets sick, but the other caged soul 
does not, then that gives her added reason to believe that something about the ranch dre ssing is 
causing the illness.  
 
The Joint Method, like the Method of Agreement, may also be used retrospectively. Here, 
however, we have access to people who got sick and people who did not get sick. Therein we 
find the added strength to this line of reason ing. Ideally, you’ll have at least two cases that 
exhibit the phenomenon in question (e.g., getting sick) and two that do not. Anything less will 
make for an ill -defined pattern and a fairly weak argument. Obviously, the more you have of 
each, the stronger  the argument can be, all else being equal.  
 
Concomitant Variation  
 
151 
 The following two kinds of causal reasoning are quite different from the previous three. 
Concomitant Variation appeals to the related correlation of two rates of change, and concludes 
that there is a causal relationship between them . Examples are easy to find:  
 
Your grandfather gives you some vinyl records and an old LP stereo system. It’s so old, that all 
the letters and numbers have been worn off the knobs. By trial and error you figure o ut how to 
turn the stereo on, and throw on a near -mint-condition copy of Meet T he Beatles . When “I Want 
to Hold Your Hand” comes on, you want to raise the volume to decibels that could neuter frogs 
at 100 yards. But you don’t know which knob will do the tr ick. You take hold of one, and at the 
rate at which you turn it you hear the volume of T he Beatles’ lilting refrains rise. As you turn the 
knob back the other direction, the song fades in volume. You conclude that you have foun d the 
cause of the volume lev el; that is, you’ve found the volume knob.  
 
Or, you are a precocious, inquisitive, and logically -minded four -year-old child. You are sitting in 
the front seat of your mother’s idling car (she’s away for the moment to deliver a Senate 
document to her Justic e Committee secretary). You don’t know how to drive, but are aware that 
the vehicle has the capacity to go quickly. Pushing aside “Re -elect Senator Sunny Shine” flyers 
from the driver’s seat, you start playing around with pedals on the floor, and note that  as you 
press one, the car begins to move. As you press it further, the car accelerates and moves faster. 
When you press the pedal to the floor, you whisk across the parking lot, slamming into other 
cars, barely missing the now -terrified ambassador from Es tonia. You let up on the pedal, and the 
car slows to a halt. You logically conclude that you have discovered the cause of the car’s 
acceleration and rate of speed. You have just used the method of Concomitant Variation.  
 
In both examples above, the concomi tant (i.e., naturally accompanying, associated, attendant) 
variation is direct, or parallel. As one thing goes up, the other thing goes up. As one thing goes 
down, the other goes down. Sometimes the relationship may be inverse, as when one thing goes 
down,  the other thing goes up. For instance, as employment rates go up, crime goes down. This 
indicates that there is a likely causal connection between crime and employment rates. It is 
beyond the method of Concomitant Variation, however, to determine which is  causing which. Is 
it the drop in crime that is causing the rise in employment rates, or is it the rise in employment 
rates that is causing the drop in crime? Common sense or further inquiry is needed to make that 
determination.  
 
More complex cases of conc omitant variation occur when, for instance, one rate of change is 
fairly steady, while another rate of change is different (either directly or inversely). For instance, 
imagine events A are changing at the rate of 1 unit per day: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6…. Let’ s say events 
B are also ascending (or descending) but more slowly, but at a different rate: 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 
3…. There still is concomitant variation, as when A goes up one unit, B goes up half a unit. 
Since the rate of change (though different) app ears to be related, we are justified in (at least 
tentatively) concluding that one set of events is causally related to the other set.  
 
But consider this. It oddly is the case in the larger of U.S. cities that as the crime rate goes up, so 
too does the amo unt of ice cream eaten; and as ice cream is eaten less often, the crime rate drops. 
Concomitant Variation indicates that ice -cream -eating is causally related to crime. We thus 
152 
 should ban all ice cream! Well, no. We might first ask which way the causal rela tion goes. Does 
eating ice cream cause crime, or does crime cause the eating of ice cream? Neither option seems 
to make much sense, so we need to look further. It won’t take us long to consider a third factor: 
rising temperatures. As temperatures rise, so too does the eating of ice cream and social irritation 
and its attendant crime. It’s the rise in temperature that drives up both crime rates and people’s 
readiness to indulge in the butterfat -laden delights of vanilla, chocolate, or strawberry ice cream. 
Concomitant Variation can point to a causal relation, but reason and further inquiry often need to 
kick in afterwards to draw specific conclusions about what causes what. Also, Concomitant 
Variation by itself does nothing to indicate if the cause is necessa ry or sufficient.  
 
Method of Residues  
 
In our introductory exploration of causal reasoning, we’ll look at one more method: the Method 
of Residues . This method works by determining that a specific state (or states) of affairs is 
caused by a fixed number of causes. After accounting for each individual cause’s specific effect, 
we conclude the remaining (or residual) effect is caused by the remaining cause. Although the 
Method of Residues can help establish a cause, it does not do much to determine if that caus e is 
necessary, sufficient, both, or neither. The pattern of the Method of Residues looks something 
like this:  
 
A and B and C in some way cause effects X and Y and Z.  
A causes X.  
B causes Y.  
Thus, it is likely that C causes Z (the residue, or what’s left o ver of the total set of effects).  
 
Here ’s an example. A logic instructor at a community college is beset by ten of his female peers. 
They all claim he ’s smart, handsome , and witty,  and want to go on dates with him. The instructor 
determines that this unsol icited attention is due to a combination of his good looks, his wealth 
from the huge amount of money he makes teaching  in the State of Washington , and his fancy 
new Subaru. Curious as to how many are interested in his dashing good looks, he borrows a 
frien d’s beater Dodge Dart and puts the word out that he no longer drives a hot Subaru wagon. 
Five of the women originally interested in him no longer even return his school -related emails. 
He then spreads the rumor that he has and will continue to donate half his pay to feeding starving 
whales off the coast of Mauritania, and two more once adulating peers drop off his radar screen  
altogether , never to be heard from again , except at longwinded division meetings . The logic 
instructor concludes that the remaining three peers are likely attracted to him due to his striking 
visage.  
 
The Method of Residues may also appeal to percentages, arguing —for instance —that because 
Cause A produces 10 percent of a set of effects, Cause B produces 15 percent of those effects, 
and Cause D produces 50 percent of the effects, it follows that Cause E probably causes 25 
percent (the remaining residue) of the effects.  
 
For instance, imagine that Tiago has a chilly draft in his home’s living room. He has determined 
that there are three causes of the draft: air coming in under his front door, a broken window, and 
153 
 an open damper in his fireplace. Tiago closes the damper and 30 percent of the draft is stopped. 
He fixes his window, and that stops 20 percent of the original draft. Tiago concl udes that the un -
insulated door is allowing 50 percent of the original draft. That 50 percent is the residue of the 
effect (i.e., the original draft) left over after accounting for the other two causes.  
 
And here’s yet another example of using the Method o f Residues. Sarah runs a grocery store and 
wants to slow down the shoplifting occurring there. She can afford only to pay for added security 
at one portion of the store’s opening hours. So she carefully records all the stock, and determines 
that 10 percent  of the theft is done in the mornings, and 15 percent of the thefts take place in the 
afternoons. She concludes that 75 percent of the thefts occur in the evening hours, and hires 
Buckkitt Security to patrol the store then.  
 
**Practice Problems: Causal Arg uments  
Answer the questions that follow each scenario below.  
 
1. Sunny Shine decides that for this year’s World Naked Gardening Day (held the first Saturday 
of each May) she would finally determine what effect Kwik -Gro fertilizer has on her primroses. 
She has two rows of these plants, each acquired from the same stock of primroses sold at the 
same store, and bought on the same day. She gives them all the same amount of water; the 
sunlight is the same for each row; the soil is the same. Dressed appropriately  for the day, she 
applies Kwik -Gro to one row, but not to the other. The row receiving Kwik -Gro soon dries up 
and dies, leaving a grub -infested, gooey mess where once were thriving primroses. Shine 
concludes that Kwik -Gro kills primroses. Which of Mill’s m ethods is Shine using? Which kind 
of cause is Kwik -Gro in killing Shine’s plants: necessary, sufficient, both, or neither?  
 
2. Pastor Bustle believes his church needs more funds so that he can give himself a raise in pay 
for preaching. He speculates that t he length of his Sunday morning sermons is affecting the 
number of parishioners willing to tithe regularly to his church. For one month he preaches for 15 
minutes. The next month he preaches for 30 minutes. The next month he preaches for 45 
minutes. And fi nally, he preaches for 60 minutes each Sunday of a month. He notes that the 
longer he preaches, the less money comes in. He concludes that to get more money, he must 
shorten his sermon time. Which method is Bustle using?  
 
3. Professor Kim wants to know wha t is a likely cause of student success (in terms of grades) in 
his Social Philosophy graduate seminar. He makes inquiries of his five students, and discovers 
that Angie reads anime comic novels regularly and studies each night for one hour; Bernardo 
studie s only once a week for hours, is the only one to use flash cards, and drinks Red Bull before 
coming to class each day; Charisa does yoga before every class, but never studies, and reads 
anime comic novels regularly; Drew can’t read, never studies, but does  yoga before class with 
Charisa, and drinks Red Bull immediately afterwards; Ewan and Bernardo believe that reading is 
a sign of capitulation to intolerant power structures and refuse to do it; Angie, Charisa, and Ewan 
are all raw vegans who drink only wat er or freshly squeezed juice; Angie, Bernardo, and Ewan 
all think yoga is for sissies and scorn any suggestion that they should practice it; and Ewan 
studies each night for an hour. Only Angie and Ewan are getting high grades in Kim’s seminar. 
Draw a table  showing the information Kim has collected. Given this information, what is the 
154 
 likely cause of receiving high grades in Kim’s seminar? What kind of cause (if determinable) is 
this (e.g., necessary, sufficient, both, neither)? Which method is Kim using?  
 
4. Bob Shine likes horse racing, and given recent misfortunes at his architectural firm, wants to 
make some extra money. He finds the jockeys for the last three winning horses and bribes them 
into giving him some information to help him on future bets. All  I Want to Be ate only oats the 
morning before the race, was never whipped by her jockey, and had Led Zeppelin played in her 
stall before the race. Badly in Need ate no oats before the race, had Barry Manilow played in her 
stall before the race, and was ne ver whipped during the race. Only Can’t Bear to Lose and All I 
Want to Be received injections of horse steroids before the race. The jockey for Can’t Bear to 
Lose is opposed to all forms of harm to animals, refuses to uses whips, feeds his horse only oats,  
and has him listen to Led Zeppelin before races. Draw a table to show the information Shine 
received. Based on this information, what is the likely cause of these horses winning their races? 
Is the cause necessary, sufficient, both, or neither? Which meth od is Shine using?  
 
5. Doctor Nan Kompos Mentis has good reason to believe that the swelling of Ellen Veegon’s 
limbs is due to three foods she eats each day —raw peanuts, tofu, and kale —and wants to know 
how much of a problem the kale in particular is causi ng. Mentis has Veegon stop eating peanuts, 
and the swelling goes down by half. Mentis then has Veegon also stop eating tofu, and the 
swelling drops down by half again. Mentis concludes that the kale is causing 25 percent of the 
original swelling. What meth od is Mentis using?  
 
6. Given the table below, what is the likely cause of Z? What method is being used? Is the cause 
necessary, sufficient, both, or neither?  
 A B C D E F G Z 
Case 1  x x x x x x x x 
Case 2  x x - x x x x - 
 
7. Given the table below, what  is the likely cause of Y? What method is being used? Is the cause 
necessary, sufficient, both, or neither?  
 A B C D E F G H Y 
Case 1  x x x x x x - x x 
Case 2  x - - x x - - x x 
Case 3  x x - x - - x - x 
Case 4  - x x x x - - - x 
 
8. Given the table belo w, what is the likely cause of W? What method is being used? Is the cause 
necessary, sufficient, both, or neither?  
 A B C D E F G H W 
155 
 Case 1  x - x - x - x - x 
Case 2  x x - x - - x - x 
Case 3  - - - - - x x x - 
Case 4  x x - - - x - x x 
Case 5  - x - - x - x - - 
Case 6  - - - x - - - - - 
Case 7  - x x x - - - - - 
 
9. Given the table below, what is the likely cause of V? What method is being used? Is the cause 
necessary, sufficient, both, or neither? (This is a more challenging problem.)  
 A B C D E F G H V 
Case 1  x - - x x x x x x 
Case 2  x x x x x x x x - 
Case 3  x x - x x - x x x 
Case 4  x x x x x x - x - 
Case 5  x x x x x x - x - 
Case 6  - - - x - x x x x 
Case 7  x x x - x x x x x 
 
10. Given the table below, what is the likely cause of U? What method i s being used? Is the 
cause necessary, sufficient, both, or neither? (This is a similarly more challenging problem.)  
 A B C D E F G H U 
Case 1  x x - - x - x x x 
Case 2  - x - x x - - - x 
Case 3  x - - - - x - x x 
Case 4  x x x x - x x x - 
Case 5  x x - - - x x - - 
Case 6  x x x x - x - x - 
 
156 
 11. The morally -challenged manager of the Chunk -O-Cheese Pizzeria thinks her ranch dressing 
is causing an outbreak of illness among her customers. She kidnaps five adults presently dining 
in her establishment, and in th e restaurant’s basement forces each to eat some of the dressing. 
One kidnapped customer is fed one tablespoon of dressing, the second is fed two tablespoons, 
the third three tablespoons, the fourth four, and the fifth five. The ones who eat more of the 
dressing get sicker than the ones who eat less. “Eureka!” she cries. “I’ve now confirmed that it’s 
the ranch dressing causing the illness!” Which method is the manager using?  
 
12. Bob Shine’s accountant says his architectural company is losing money to theft,  and that the 
thefts are limited to employees stealing office supplies, employees using company gasoline to 
drive to Reno for weekends, and employees using company vouchers for private dinners. Bob 
cancels all food vouchers and locks up the company gas tan ks. Monetary loss due to stealing 
drops 75 percent. He concludes that 25 percent of the employ theft was from stealing office 
supplies. Which method is Shine using?  
 
13. The cook at Joe’s Café wants to experiment with his meatloaf. He makes two batches, 
cooking both at the same temperature in the same oven and for the same length of time. The 
recipes are exactly the same except that he adds a quarter cup of bourbon to one batch. Everyone 
in the cafe likes the bourbon meatloaf better, and Joe concludes that bourbon makes his original 
recipe more popular. Which method is Joe using? Is the bourbon a necessary cause, sufficient 
cause, both, or neither?  
 
14. Albert drank five Scotch and sodas, and got drunk. Barney drank five bourbon and sodas, and 
got drunk. Cha rlene drank five gin and sodas, and got drunk. Doris drank five rum and sod as, 
and got drunk. Tiago is watching all of this and concluded that soda causes people to get drunk. 
Which method is Tiago attempting to use (albeit, not very well)?  
 
15. What might  a logical and informed person do to show Tiago (from Problem #14) that his 
conclusion is mistaken and that the alcohol in the drinks caused the people to get drunk?  
 
Answers:  
1. Method of Difference; sufficient cause.  
2. Concomitant Variation.  
3. 
 Reads 
anime 
comic 
novels  Studies 
each 
night for 
1 hour  Studies 
once per 
week for 
hours  Uses 
flash 
cards  Drinks 
Red Bull  Does 
yoga  Get high 
grades  
Angie  x x - - - - x 
Bernardo  - - x x x - - 
Charisa  x - - - - x - 
Drew  - - - - x x - 
157 
 Ewan  - x - - - - x 
Studying  each night for one hour is the likely cause of the high grades; necessary and sufficient 
cause; Joint Method.  
4. 
 Ate oats  Ate hay  Not 
whipped  Led 
Zeppelin  Barry 
Manilow  Horse 
steroids  Won a 
race 
All I 
Want to 
Be x - x x - x x 
Badly in 
Need  - x x - x - x 
Can’t 
Bear to 
Lose  x - x - x x x 
Not being whipped by the jockey is the likely cause of the wins; necessary cause; Method of 
Agreement.  
5. Method of Residues.  
6. The likely cause of Z is C; Method of Difference; sufficient cause.  
7. The likely cause of  Y is D; Method of Agreement; necessary cause.  
8. The likely cause of W is A; Joint Method; necessary and sufficient cause.  
9. We’re clearly not using Concomitant Variation or Method of Residues. That leaves the first 
three methods. But it’s not Method of Difference, because there are not two cases being 
compared in which they are exactly the same except for one difference. If we were using the 
Method of Agreement, then all the cases would experience the phenomenon in question (i.e., V). 
So we are using the  Joint Method, which makes sense since we are appealing to three or more 
each of cases that did and did not experience V. No causal factor (i.e., A -H) matches perfectly 
with the phenomenon in question, but factor G matches the best, so it is the most likel y cause 
among these eight factors. Where G is experienced, V is uniformly experienced, too, so G 
“agrees” with H, thus providing a necessary cause. But the failure to experience G does not 
match up perfectly with the failure to experience V, so G does not quite provide a sufficient 
cause. This is a case of using the Joint Method, but it is not giving us everything we would like 
from it.  
10. The likely cause of U is E; Joint Method; sufficient (but not necessary) cause.  
11. Concomitant Variation.  
12. Method of Residues.  
13. Method of Difference; sufficient cause.  
14. Method of Agreement. Obviously, though, it’s not the soda that causes people to get drunk, 
but the Method of Agreement alone cannot tell us this. Now go to Problem #15.  
15. One way to do this is to use the Joint Method. Have a variety of people drink a variety of 
liquids (five glasses each), some containing alcohol, while other drinks do not. If our hypothesis 
is correct (i.e., that the alcohol is the one and only cause of the people getting drunk ), then all 
people guzzling drinks with alcohol will get drunk, and none of the people sipping alcohol -free 
158 
 drinks will get drunk. The Method of Difference might be helpful, too. We can get a series of 
pairs of people of roughly the same height, body mass,  gender, and age (factors that may play a 
role in how easily one gets drunk), and give half of them five drinks with alcohol, and have half 
of them five drinks exactly the same except without alcohol. If the alcohol drinkers get drunk 
and the others do not , then it looks like alcohol is a sufficient cause for getting drunk (i.e., from 
this information, it is possible still that some other drug can make people drunk, too).  
159 
 Chapter 12: Hypotheses  
 
We often face philosophically interesting questions, those wh ose proposed answers thoughtful 
and informed people are debating. Whether murdering people to steal their money is morally 
right or wrong is not philosophically interesting in this sense. All reasonable and informed 
people agree that it’s wrong. Why it’s w rong is philosophically interesting, though, because there 
remains thoughtful, informed debate on that more basic issue. Of continued philosophical 
interest include questions such as, “Is euthanasia always morally wrong?” “How did the 
dinosaurs die?” “Was O. J. Simpson guilty of murder?” “How should teachers respond to student 
cheating?” “Does God exist?” “What role does race play in U.S. politics today?” “Should 
baristas be able to serve lattes buck naked?” There are intelligent, informed people still 
disagreeing on such matters.  
 
If there are two proposed theories —or hypotheses —answering a question, and one of them has a 
clear preponderance of evidence or good argumentation on its side, then rational people should 
embrace that better -supported theory. Havi ng a clear superiority of evidence does not guarantee 
that one ans wer, theory, or hypothesis true,  but as rational beings, we want —and probably 
should —embrace the view that is most justified or warranted. But what should we do if there are 
multiple opposin g answers to an important question, and each answer lacks any clear evidence, 
or any clear preponderance of evidence? What if e ach answer is equal  in terms of evidence and 
support? It may be that we could ignore the situation, and put the question “on a sh elf,” so to 
speak, not worrying about it until more evidence comes in directing us to embrace rationally one 
over the other. But sometimes the question is vital enough that we need to move forward and 
work with a viewpoint. Guessing or simply going for the  answer that “feels” right will hardly do 
for rational people, at least if there is more that can be said in favor of one hypothesis over 
another. Fortunately, there is a set of principles that can help in this regard, and before giving in 
to guesswork or personal, arbitrarily biased feelings, these principles are worth considering. 
They form criteria articulating what we’d want out of any well functioning hypothesis, that is, 
out of any viable answer to a puzzling question.  
 
An hypothesis  is a proposed ans wer to a puzzling question.  If a police detective finds a dead 
man with a knife in his back, the puzzling problem might be “Who killed the man?” or “Why 
was this man killed?” An archeologist might ask at an excavation site, “Why and how did this 
group of people construct this stone building?” A medical researcher might ask, “What can cure 
this particular form of cancer?” A philosopher might ask, “What is the ultimate nature of who we 
are?” A theologian might ask, “Why would an all -good God allow evil in th e world?” All are 
philosophically interesting questions, and multiple hypotheses have been offered for each. 
Sometimes empirical evidence or logical analysis shows an hypothesis to be unworthy of serious 
consideration. Sometimes, however, two or more hypot heses have just as much —or just as 
little—evidence backing them up, and it’s not clear which one (or ones) is true.  
 
What we might do in such bothersome situations is  consider what we want out of an hypothesis. 
There are certain character traits that an id eal hypothesis will have, just like there are ideal 
character traits a hammer will have. If you are in need of a hammer, but don’t know at this point 
160 
 which kind you need (small or large, framing, ball -peen, claw and nail, dead -blow, sledge, 
masonry, or roc k pick), you at least want a hammer that does the job of a hammer. If you had to 
select a hammer for some use, but did not know what kind to use, and had to choose from a 
poorly crafted masonry hammer or a superbly crafted claw and nail hammer, you’d be ad vised to 
select the latter, better constructed tool. It may turn out that it’s not the best hammer for the job, 
but for the moment, you are rational in tentatively embracing  the better crafted hammer.  
 
This embracing of a hammer or hypotheses is tentative and non -dogmatic, as being well -crafted 
provides no evidence that it’s the best hammer for the job or the correct answer to your puzzling 
question. Still, we may need a working hypothesis to march forward to do medical research, or to 
inquire further into the philosophic question at hand, or to guide the police detective in searching 
for a killer. If evidence or arguments turn up that make our hypothesis look bad, then we are 
ready to give it up, as we’ve not committed ourselves too strongly to it; we are e mbracing it only 
tentatively, until more information comes in.  
 
We’ll consider five criteria for superior hypotheses. If we find ourselves with two hypotheses to 
choose from, and if we are in need  of adopting an hypothesi s to move forward to do the work we  
need to do, then we will be advised to  adopt tentatively the hypothesi s that meets these criteria 
the best. This is not, however, an argument for the truth of the hypothesis. The “better crafted” 
hypothesis may still be incorrect, and the one with virtual ly no evidence and lacking in some 
important character traits may still be the true one, but we can use the appeal to these principles 
to say that one hypothesis is better —as an hypothesis —than the other, and that warrants us in 
tentatively working with it  for the time being. We’ll need to wait until new evidence or 
argumentation comes in to justify our saying that the hypothesis is actually true.  
 
Criteria for Hypotheses  
 
An ideal hypothesis will have five character traits. The hypothesis will exhibit:  
 
Explanatory power  
External consistency  
Internal consistency  
Fruitfulness  
Simplicity  
 
If we are considering two hypotheses, one may look good regarding a couple criteria, while the 
other may look good in reference to two or three others. There is no way to qu antify precisely 
how well one hypothesis meets these criteria when compared to another. We need to consider 
each hypothesis, and then make a judgment as to which one ov erall—and all else being equal —
functions best as an hypothesis. We’ll then tentatively e mbrace that one.  
 
Explanatory Power  
 
The purpose of an hypothesis is to provide an answer to a potentially puzzling question. If the 
hypothesis doesn’t do that, it’s not functioning very well. Let’s say that Bob stubs his toe on the 
161 
 bedpost one night, and wonders why that happened. He might hypothesize that God caused it to 
happen. As an hypothesis, this doesn’t explain much. It doesn’t explain why God wanted Bob to 
stub his toe, or how God caused the event to take place. It may be true that God exi sts and caused 
Bob to stub his toe, but a thinking person will likely —all else being equal —be inclined to look 
for another theory that provides a more detailed explanatory  answer.  
 
What we want out of hypotheses is as much relevant information as possible. If the question 
pertains to the cause of a mysterious event, ideally we’d like the hypothesis to tell us what 
happened, what caused it to happen, why  it happened the way it did,  how it happened , and to do 
so for as many of the details of the event as possible . Mo reover, an ideal hypothesis will do all 
this with clarity, detail , and precision. Of course, that may be too much to ask for in certain 
situations, but if we have two purported answers to a question and the first hypothesis answers 
more of the question and  in greater detail than the second, then al l else being equal the first is the 
better hypothesis.  
 
Consider a medical researcher who seeks the cause of a form of paralysis. Hypothesis A says the 
illness is caused by breathing polluted air. Hypothesis B say s that drinking tap water from rusty 
pipes over the course of one year will damage nerves, cause tingling in the extremities initially, 
and eventually produce paralysis. Hypothesis B answers more of the question than Hypothesis A, 
and does so with far more  detail. If the evidence and argumentation for A is equal to that of B, 
then because B has more explanatory power than A, we should prefer it over A…at least 
tentatively. We must keep in mind that just because an hypothesis provides broad -ranging and 
detai led answers to a question, does not itself show that the answer  is correct. It just means that 
the hypothesis is doing what hypotheses are supposed to do.  
 
We also want an hypothesis to fit the facts in question as precisely as possible. If the rusty water  
pipe hypothesis merely accounted for “a number” people becoming ill, while the less 
encompassing bad air hypothesis explained why exactly 25 people in a given community would 
become ill, then in that regard the bad air hypothesis is the better of the two.  As it stands now in 
our scenario, there is reason under the criterion of being explanatory to favor both hypotheses. 
That’s no surprise as  thinking people rarely consider woeful ly bad hypotheses for very long; on 
the flip side, viable hypotheses tend to h ave something going for them to keep them under 
consideration.  
 
Moreover, the hypothesis will ideally explain other analogous questions equally well. For 
instance, if beekeepers find that their hives of bees in one Washington county are sick and come 
up wi th an hypothesis that accounts for it well, then that hypothesis should —in principle —work 
for other similar  cases of bee hive illnesses. Hypotheses should thus not be ad hoc and arbitrary; 
if they answer one puzzling question well, they should be of use wi th other relevantly similar 
puzzling questions.  
 
External Consistency  
 
A good hypothesis will also be externally consistent . By that we mean that the hypothesis does 
not conflict with what we know (or think we know) about the world, and that it conform s to the 
162 
 facts as we understand them. That is, all else being equal, we don’t want to embrace an 
hypothesis that forces us to give up well -established beliefs. For instance, if you follow the 
motion of Mars in the sky over the course of many nights, you might observe it moving in one 
direction, then switching back for a time, then moving back in its original direction. This 
observed oddity of planetary movement is called retrograde motion. What causes it? One less -
than-sure-footed astronomer might hypothesize t hat five -year-old boys are floating in space 
pushing Mars around. Obviously, this is an embarrassingly ridiculous hypothesis, but it’s 
ridiculous because it patently goes against what we kn ow to be true about little boys:  their lack 
of existence in space  and their lack of power to move planets. We reject the hypothesis out of 
hand because it lacks external consistency, and —all else being equal —this is enough to make us 
smile upon a more externally consistent alternative hypothesis.  
 
Two competing hypotheses  migh t both be externally consistent;  that is, they match up equally 
with what we are confident is true about the world. For instance, if a mysterious light appears in 
the sky at night, and we want to theorize about its cause, two people might come up with  
differing hypotheses: the light is caused by either a military plane or a distress flare shot up by 
someone on the ground. Both hypotheses are consistent with what we know to be true of the 
world. In this case, we either need to find additional evidence o r argumentation for embracing 
one hypothesis over the other, or, short of that, one hypothesis needs to meet the other criteria 
better.  
 
A potential problem lies in that what we are psychologically confident in may actually be false. 
Belief and perspective  do not by themselves determine truth or reality. We can be mistaken. This 
perfectly reasonable and humble position is called falliblism  (i.e., the acknowledgement that we 
are fallible, or able to make errors in judgment about the world). So, just because an hypothesis 
is inconsistent with something we take to be true about the world, it does not follow with 
certainty that the hypothesis is false. It may be that we are mistaken about the world and the 
hypothesis is true. To the degree we can be justifiably confident in our belief about the world, to 
that degree we can be confident that an hypothesis inconsistent with this belief has something 
seriously wrong with it. One important lesson to learn here is that when making hypotheses, we 
need to be aware of th e assumptions we make in the process. Our assumptions might be 
mistaken. None of this warrants becoming overly skeptical about every little belief about the 
world, but we need to be careful nonetheless.  
 
Internal Consistency  
 
An hypothesis must also be internally consistent . All the parts of an hypothesis must be 
consistent with and not contradict each other. A self -contradictory hypothesis has something 
seriously wrong with it. All else being equal, if one hypothesis is more internally consistent than 
another, the more consistent one is to be preferred.  
 
An hypothesis to a complex problem will usually have multiple parts. For instance, if we are 
interested in why the dinosaurs died, one might come up with a “meteorite hypothesis” having 
numerous parts. For instance, (a) a meteorite hit the earth causing (b) a huge dust cloud that (c) 
blocked sunlight and (d) killed plants which caused (e) dinosaurs to starve to death. There are at 
163 
 least five major elements to this hypothesis. Here, so it seems, each part is consistent with the 
others.  
 
The highly influential French philosopher Rene Descartes (1596 -1650) is said by many scholars 
to have offered an hypothesis regarding the nature of reality that was internally inconsistent . 
Descartes hypothesized that reality i s made up of two radically distinct substances: mind and 
body. What is true of one, is not true of the other. Mind is immaterial, takes up no space, is 
indivisible, and thinks. Body is material, spatial, divisible, and does not think. We call this two -
substance view Dualism . Descartes  also hypothesized that with humans the mind and body have 
a causal relation with each other. The view is called Interactionism . For instance, one can cause 
one’s arm to move by using one’s mind to think, “Raise my arm!” Also, the body can cause 
mental events in the mind. If someone kicks your physical knee, that causes the mental event of a 
pain. A problem facing Descartes is that the combination of Dualism and Interactionism really 
seems to be internally inconsistent. For it i s inexplicable how a non -material entity like 
Descartes’s mind can have any physical effect on his material body, and vice -versa. The mind 
has no substance or energy (note that energy and matter are related, and are part of the bodily 
world); it would be l ike an immaterial ghost trying to punch a living person. The ghost’s “fist” 
would go right through the living man’s face. (If you’ve seen the movie Ghost (1990) starring 
Patrick Swayze and Demi Moore, you will be aware of this problem.)  
 
Fruitfulness  
 
An h ypothesis that will make most inquirers jump with joy will be what we’ll call fruitful . One 
way an hypothesis can be “fruitful” is to provide opportunities to test it. Some hypotheses are 
simply impossible to verify or falsify; there’s no way even in princ iple to tell if they’re true or 
false. To wax theological once again, if a family member gets sick and we want to know why, if 
we hypothesize that it’s God’s will, the hypothesis is completely untestable. There is nothing we 
can do to show if the hypothesi s is correct or not. We can pray and ask God to give us a verifying 
sign of event X, Y, or Z, but if the event does not occur, then we still won’t know that God’s will 
was not causally involved with the sickness, because God could have decided —for whatever  
good reason —not to provide the requested sign.  If the sign does appear, we’ll not be sure that it 
actually came from God, or came from Him for that purpose. Maybe He’s “testing”  us. There’s 
no way to know.  
 
Scientists sometimes seem to be at odds with bel ievers on various issues. The origin of life, 
changes within a species, the death of the dinosaurs, the plausibility of a global flood, the 
existence of God, and similar puzzles often find each party with different (sometimes 
conflicting) hypotheses. There  are many intelligent, informed scientists who believe in God, and 
as a matter of their faith believe various things that may not be empirically verifiable or 
falsifiable. Still as scientists, they will also likely seek —when possible —hypotheses that can be  
tested. That’s what in large part makes them scientifically minded. They understand that a true, 
accurate hypothesis may be untestable, but as long as the possibility remains, they will want —as 
scientists —to examine other hypotheses that can be tested. Al l else being equal, an hypothesis 
that can be tested is preferable to one that cannot. At least, that’s the sort of hypothesis we’ll 
164 
 want to tentatively embrace until a preponderance of evidence or argumentation comes in 
favoring one hypothesis over anothe r. 
 
We also want hypotheses to be fruitful in another way. We want them to lead us to further 
inquiry, to be springboards, as it were, for continued discussion. If an hypothesis gives no hint as 
to what we might do or develop  for further research or testin g, or if the hypothesis in principle 
suggests no further avenue of discussion, then again it’s not doing much for us. It may be true 
and accurately answer the question at hand, but as an hypothesis, it’s largely useless to us. For 
example, someone might at tribute a bout of stomach flu to the karmic effects of bad actions 
performed in a previous life. The law of karma can have explanatory power, be internally 
consistent, and externally consistent, and but it is not a very fruitful hypothesis, as (a) it’s not  at 
all testable in any practical way, and (b) it gives little or no new insight as to how to test a 
purported karmic law or how to think or inquire about it further.  
 
Simplicity  
 
The Principle of Simplicity urges us to adopt —all else being equal —the simpl er of two 
hypotheses. Called “Ockham’s Razor” in Europe’s Medieval Period, and referred to in India 
since its Classical Period as “The Principle of Lightness,” this criterion does not suggest we 
tentatively adopt the hypothesis that is easiest for us to un derstand. We don’t mean “simple” in 
this sense. Rather, the hypothesis that appeals to the fewest number of entities, or the least 
complex set of entities is less likely to be mistaken.  
 
Imagine two automobiles of equal quality, but one has twice as many m oving parts as the other. 
Which is more likely to break down most often? The more complex car, as it has more ways to 
break. So too with hypotheses. One making ten claims has more ways to be inconsistent with the 
world or internally inconsistent with itsel f, than an hypothesis making only three claims. Years 
ago, the Honda automobile company ran ads singing, “Honda…we make it simple.” They were 
saying that Hondas were so simple that they would last a long time without breaking down. 
Many people liked that i dea, bought the cars, and made Honda a major car producer 
internationally.  
 
Another way to look at simplicity is to think of an hypothesis’s “modesty.” A modest hypothesis 
claims only what is needed to answer the puzzling questions powerfully. That is, the  ideal 
hypothesis is trimmed down to the bare essentials, so that it can do the job of explaining in detail 
what needs explaining, but makes no extra claim that could end up being false. Simplicity  in this 
sense can initially appear to be in conflict with the robust demands of explanatory power , but it’s 
not. The best hypothesis will be as streamlined as possible, yet still do their designated job.  
 
By way of illustration, let’s go back in time to when the Italian scientist and philosopher Galileo 
Galilei ( 1564 -1642) was challenging the dominant geocentric view of the universe devised by 
Ptolemy centuries beforehand. Galileo believed that the Sun was the center of the universe (i.e., 
Copernicus’s heliocentrism), while the Church defended the Earth -centered s ystem long and 
hard. Technology had not advanced yet to the degree that could provide detailed evidence for 
one view or to show that one hypothesis was clearly the best. For a time, both sides had little to 
165 
 appeal to other than these five criteria.  We might imag ine the following conversation  between 
Galileo and his geocentric opponent. (See Galileo ’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World 
Systems: Ptolemaic and Copernican  for his actual arguments along these lines.)  
 
Galileo: Well, my development of teles copes still leaves something to be desired, so I can’t yet 
use precise, detailed measurements of the starry heavens to show that the heliocentric system 
offered by Copernicus is measurably best, but my hypothesis is better than your Ptolemaic 
geocentric on e, at least as far as hypotheses go.  
 
Opponent: Bah! My theory explains things well. It explains why planets and stars appear to 
move across the night sky in the directions they do, and how they are arranged.  
 
G: So does my heliocentric theory. I’ll admit that your picture explains as much as mine, but 
that’s not where my hypothesis shows its strength.  
 
O: Strength? Strength? You can’t handle strength! You want strength? Take a look at the 
external consistency of geocentricism. If your doofus hypothesis was  true, the Earth would be 
moving through space. But does it feel like the Earth is moving? No! Also, if the Earth is moving 
rapidly through space, wouldn’t we notice a strong wind constantly coming from one direction? 
But we don’t! And, if I hold this smal l rock over this X marked on the table, and drop the rock, if 
the Earth is moving, the X should slide over to one direction, and the rock shouldn’t hit it. But it 
does hit it…dead on every time! So your hypothesis is not nearly as consistent with what we 
know about the world. Plus, the Bible says the Earth sits still and the Sun moves around it. It’s in 
the book of Joshua or somewhere.  
 
G: Well, I’m not going to argue today with the Bible, and I’ve got to admit that much of what we 
normally take to be obvio usly true about the world is pretty consistent with geocentricism, but 
my hypothesis is better nonetheless.  
 
O: Humph!  
 
G: My hypothesis is internally consistent. There are no parts to it that contradict one another.  
 
O: So too with mine.  
 
G: Yah, I suppos e so. I don’t believe your hypothesis, but it at least seems to hold together 
internally.  
 
O: Now look at the fruitfulness of my geocentric picture. Sailors can assume that it’s true and use 
it to navigate across vast seas and get exactly where they wish t o go. Also, we can test my 
hypothesis. For instance, if my hypothesis is true, then —given careful calculations —we can 
predict accurately where Mars will be in the night sky weeks from now, and do so with a high 
degree of accuracy.  
 
G: Yah, but my heliocent ric hypothesis can do the same thing. So it’s a tie as far as fruitfulness 
goes.  
 
O: So what’s your big strength? Why on our geocentric Earth should anyone think that your 
hypothesis —as an hypothesis —is better than mine?  
 
G: Because mine is more simple. To  make yours work, that is, to make yours help sailors get 
across the sea or to draw implications as to where Mars will be later this week, you have to 
166 
 appeal to gobs and gobs of epicycles, deferents, and equants. My Copernican system of 
heliocentricism app eals to far fewer such entities. Thus my hypothesis is simpler. Thus my 
hypothesis is —all else being equal —to be preferred, at least tentatively, until I improve my 
scientific instruments and show that I can predict planetary motion far more accurately and  with 
more detail than you can with your soon -to-be outmoded geocentricism.  
 
O: I doubt it. You’re always talking about new technology. Our hypotheses appear close to a tie 
at this point, and given that the Church says the Earth sits still, I think it’s be st to go with that 
view.  
 
G: Shall we then talk about these craters I recently found on the Moon?  
 
O: Ack! Heresy!  
 
**Thinking  Problems: Criteria for Hypotheses  
Consider each of two competing hypotheses, and write a mini -dialogue in which characters 
appeal  to the five criteria for hypotheses to support tentatively embracing one hypothesis over 
the other.  
 
1. The doctrines of karma and reincarnation are true vs. Life ’s a beach, then you die…period  
2. Jesus was resurrected  from the dead vs. No way José!  
3. Evolution vs. Creationism  
4. Free will vs. Determinism  
 
Answers: 
Obviously, there are hundreds of ways to write dialogues for each debate. This is a rare time 
when “answers” will not be provided in this text. But ask yourself: As hypotheses, which criteria 
does each side meet well? As an hypothesis, does one side meet more of the criteria, or meet 
some of them better? If evidence for one outweighs the evidence of the other, then we don’t need 
to worry too much about these criteria; so for the sake of discuss ion, assume the empirical 
evidence or strength of argument is either equal or equally non -existent for each.  
 
**Practice Problems: Criteria for Hypotheses  
Which one of the five criteria for hypotheses is the speaker below most clearly considering?  
 
1. “My hypothesis is better because mine appeals to A and B, while your s appeals to A, B, and 
C.” 
2.  “Your hypothesis is worse than mine, because yours appeals to A and B, but A and B can’t 
both be true.”  
3. “How on Earth could we ever determine if your hypothes is is true or not?”  
4. “Your hypothesis is so vague that it fails to answer any of the question with any precision.”  
5.  “Your explanation for the origin of life on Earth appeals to a giant silicon -based being deep in 
space sending a  rocket with sperm cell s on the nose cone. But we have no reason to believe that 
there is any such intelligent life out there.” [Note: This was an hypothesis of a Nobel P rize-
winning astrophysicist.]  
6. “Your hypothesis says that the dinosaurs died d ue to starvation, but it also  claims they died 
due to a virus. Which was it?”  
167 
 7. “You hypothesize that Bob died from suicide. But we who knew him best knew him to be 
happy and quite content with life.”  
8. “You theorize that Sunny Shine’s proclivity to garden and cycle naked is due to a complex set 
of early maladjusted family relationships that produced neuroses resulting in mannerisms 
conjoined with environmental factors producing her deviant social behavior. Isn’t it more likely 
that she enjoys being clothes -free just because it feels  good?”  
9. “The resurrection hypothesis accounts for the apostles’ later purportedly first -hand testimony 
of it and willingness to die for it better than any other hypothesis regarding the days following 
Jesus’ death. There’s no way the apostles would die brutally for what they knew to be a lie.”  
10. “I can’t test my theory that after we die life is over any more than you can test your theory 
that the law of karma forces us to be reincarnated. For once we die, either way, we’re not going 
to be able to let o thers know what happened.”  
11. “Your hypotheses consists of claims A, B, C, and D. But we know from experience that C is 
false. Thus we should reject your hypothesis.”  
12. “Your hypothesis regarding the murder implies both that Albert hated his wife and th at he 
cared for her. No way!”  
13. “Evolution makes no appeal to a divine intelligence, yet accounts for life as we know it. Thus 
it’s a better hypothesis than Creationism.”  
14. “Free will matches up with the fact of moral responsibility and moral deliberat ion better than 
your determinist hypothesis saying that all acts are fully caused by antecedent conditions. Thus 
the free will hypothesis is better than the determinist hypothesis.”  
15. “My hypothesis explains ten aspects of the puzzling question at hand; yours explains only 
five of them. Thus my hypothesis is a better hypothesis, all else being equal.”  
 
Answers:  
1. Simplicity    6. Internal consistency   11. External consistency  
2. Internal consistency  7. External consistency   12. Internal consistency  
3. Fru itfulness    8. Simplicity     13. Simplicity  
4. Explanatory power   9. External consistency   14. External consistency  
5. External consistency  10. Fruitfulness    15. Explanatory power  
 
Inference to the Best Explanation  
 
A growing number of philosophers and ot her thinkers are appealing to these five criteria for 
good hypotheses to engage in an inductive line of reasoning: Inference to the Best Explanation.  
It’s worth seeing how this form  of critical thinking can be used.  
 
Once again, consider the situation in w hich there are two or more opposing answers to a 
question, yet there is insufficient evidence or argumentation to clearly point to one hypothesis 
being better supported than another. Once th e equally -supported (or equally -unsupported) 
hypotheses are on the  table, so to speak, we might try arguing by claiming that our hypothesis is 
better than any of the others, and on that basis should be accepted as most likely the true one. 
The way we establish that our hypothesis is better than the others is by showing t hat it best 
conforms to the criteria above. Perhaps —all else being equal —it answers more of the puzzling 
question, or perhaps it’s simpler , or perhaps it matches up with established beliefs better. None 
168 
 of this goes to prove that our hypothesis is true, bu t it does argue that in comparison to the other 
offer ed hypotheses, ours is a better -formed answer to the question.  
 
Users of Inference to the Best Explanation must be careful to avoid certain pitfalls, though. One 
obvious potential problem for us is to vi ew our hypothesis as the best because we merely think it 
the best. That would clearly be begging the question. We can’t say our hypothesis is better than 
the others without some sort of good reason . If there is objective reason to say our hypothesis is 
true, then we don’t need Inference to the Best Explanation; that objective reason itself gives 
adequate justification for believing our hypothesis. What we are limited in doing with Inference 
to the Best Explanation is arguing that our hypothesis is better fo rmed as an hypothesis than the 
others, and somehow that makes it more likely for it to be true. This is a tenuous bit of reasoning, 
but it should at least justify everyone giving a serious look at our hypothesis.  
 
Another potential problem to avoid when us ing Inference to the Best Explanation is a common 
(perhaps  all-too-human) tendency  to believe one’s  proposed hypothesis, and to see more readily 
how it conforms to the criteria above, while ignoring how the other hypotheses do so. Comparing 
competing h ypotheses by appealing to the five  criteria is not an exact science, and often cannot 
be quantified precisely. It’s usually a matter of considering informally the merits of each 
hypothesis, weighing the results, and making a thoughtful judgment when possible.  Rarely will 
assessment of opposing hypotheses presented by intellige nt and informed people result in a case 
of one being clearly the “best explanation,” unless, of course, there is some underlying begging 
of the question.  
 
A third potential problem is to i nadvertently embrace the informal fallacy of False Dichotomy. 
Inference to the Best Explanation argues this way:  
 
1. There are two (or three, or four, etc.) opposing hypotheses.  
2. My hypothesis fits the criteria for hypotheses best of the two, making it t he best explanation.  
3. Thus , it is likely that my hypothesis is true.  
 
False Dichotomy occurs when someone offers a disjunctive syllogism (i.e., A or B; Not -A; Thus, 
B) when there i s an additional option  not being considered. Recall the teenager argument from 
our section on Informal Fallacies. “Mom, either you let me go to the dance with the biker gang, 
or my life will be ruined. Surely you don’t want my life to be ruined. Thus, you should let me go 
to the dance with this gang .” Mothers  somehow intuitively  know bad arguments, at least when 
presented by teenagers. They recognize that there is at least a third option not being considered 
in the daughter ’s first premise: She will not go to the dance with the biker gang, and her life will 
not be ruined. So, no,  permission to boogie with the leather -clad ruffians is denied.  
 
So too with Inference to the Best Explanation. We must be sure —and have some reason to offer 
for believing so —that the hypothes es we are comparing are  the o nly ones meriting  consider ation 
(and not beg the question i n our hypothesis’s favor in doing so). The burden of proof is on our 
shoulders to show that there are no addition al hypotheses worth considering;  and if we cannot 
offer such justification, then we should limit ourselves to concludin g that our hypothesis matches 
the criteria for hypotheses better than do the others we are considering, and on that basis we are 
169 
 justified in taking it  seriously as a viable hypothesi s. But this falls somewhat short of being able 
to claim that we have via this inference pa ttern given reason to believe our hypothesis  is true.  
 
The long and the short of it may be that when well -established evidence or cogent/sound 
reasoning does not clearly establish that one thoughtful hypothesis is more likely to be true ov er 
a competitor, Inference to the Best Explanation may be the best line of reasoning we have. Be 
careful not to overstate its powers, though.  
 
Testing Hypotheses  
 
One of the criteria for an ideal hypothesis was its fruitfulness, which included its ability to be 
tested. We now need to explore how we might reasonably test an hypothesis. The procedure is 
not obvious, and it was only “discovered” a few hundred years ago. With that process, scientists 
in Europe were able to make startlingly fast advances in know ledge about the natural world and 
in technological development. Those advances gave Europe the opportunity to do much good 
and bad in the world, and to make “the West” a powerful forced internationally. Hypothetical 
reasoning or the Scientific Method was n ot the only way of pursuing knowledge, but it has 
proven to be an effective and productive way of sorting out viable from non -viable hypotheses, 
and thus paves the way for even more advances in theory and practical development.  
 
Hypothetical reasoning is u seful particularly when we cannot find an answer directly to a 
puzzling problem. Let’s say we find blue polluting goo floating down a stream, and we want to 
find the cause of this goo. All we need to do is walk up the stream. If we find a large pipe with 
this goo pouring out of it, and we see no blue goo flowing down from upstream, we’ve pretty 
well established where the goo came from. End of inquiry. But if the puzzling question pertains 
to events that happened in the past (e.g., How did those dinosaurs di e?), or far away (e.g., Are 
mountains forming on Mars the same way they form on Earth?”), then we may not be able to 
look or test directly to determine the answer. Here we’d need to form an hypothesis, and devise a 
clever way of testing it indirectly . Ther ein lies the brilliancy of hypothetical reasoning, aka “the 
Scientific Method.”  
 
Hypothetical Reasoning involves a series of steps:  
 
1. Articulate a puzzling  problem  
2. Collect information  
3. Form an hypothesis  
4. Draw an implication  to the hypothesis  
5. Test the implication  
6. Draw a conclusion  
 
1. Articulate a puzzling  problem  
 
We begin the process with a puzzling  problem  that cannot be answered or explained with direct 
observation or testing. For instance, if Bill wants to know why Mary is angry (a puzzl ing 
problem, at least for Bill), he might ask her. If she’s willing, she’ll tell him: “You bumped into 
170 
 my car when yo u backed out of our  driveway, you idiot!” Bill has no need of hypothetical 
reasoning here, as he can get his answer directly. Sometimes, ho wever, there is no one to ask and 
no opportunity to observe to get an answer. The cause of events in the distant past can be like 
this (e.g., a puzzling migration of an ancient civilization from one site to another), or events can 
occur in unobservable loc ations (e.g., on other planets, or at the center of the Earth, or at the 
atomic level). Here we can make use of hypothetical reasoning.  
 
2. Collect information  
 
Before we are in a position to make a good hypothesis, we’re going to need some information . If 
we want to know what caused the dinosaurs to die, we’ll need to know what dinosaurs are, how 
they lived, and how they might die. We’ll need to draw from our knowledge about the world to 
form a reasonable answer to the question. If a police detective had t he puzzling probl em of 
determining who killed a  man lying on the floor, he’d walk around the room looking at every 
detail he thinks might be relevant. That Barack Obama was the U.S. president in 2010 is 
probably not relevant here, so the detective would no t consider it. He’d likely consider a note 
clutched in the dead man’s hands and a knife in his back as relevant. Note that the detective will 
need to approach this stage of the inquiry already having a general idea as to what is likely to 
count as relevant  information. This takes some previous background knowledge that not 
everyone has. A good detective will know enough and be experienced enough to make good 
judgments as to what might be important information regarding a murder. The detective will be 
observ ant enough not to let little details slide by his or her observation. Think of the television 
detective Adrian Monk walking around a crime scene with his hands squared up to help focus his 
search for details that can help him later form an hypothesis.  
 
Two points are worth noting already. First, to form a viable hypothesis, one usually needs to 
have a good deal of background knowledge about the situation. If we know nothing about how 
dinosaurs lived and how they might die, we’ll be hard pressed to come up w ith a reasonable 
answer to our question. Also, assumptions grounded in our world view will impact what 
information we consider to be relevant to the question. If we mistakenly assume, for instance, 
that all murders are caused by anger, then we’d miss or ig nore any information that might prod 
us to hypothesize that a murder took place because of greed. If we assume that animals die only 
from Earth -caused forces (e.g., disease, animal attacks, drowning, earthquakes), then we might 
miss or ignore information t hat might warrant our considering a cause of death from space (e.g., 
a meteo rite carrying a deadly virus). We should thus be aware as best we can of any biases or 
assumptions we bring to the inquiry, and be aware that they can limit what information we 
collect in the process of forming an hypothesis.  
 
3. Form an hypothesis  
 
Forming an hypothesis  takes a certain amount of creativity, and that’s why some people are 
better at it than others. Two police detectives can enter the same room, collect the same 
infor mation at the crime scene, but only one may pull it all together, see a pattern, and visualize 
what might have happened. Two auto mechanics examine the same stalled engine, but only one 
comes up with a reason to explain the problem. Only one, then, might h ave the creativity —or 
171 
 genius —to form a viable answer to the question at hand. Some scientists, doctors, police 
detectives, and au to mechanics are better than others at this task.  
 
The hypothesis will ideally meet the five criteria discussed above. It will explain why the 
dinosaurs died in some detail, or who killed the man on the floor, how, and why. In both cases, 
we cannot simply look to see if the hypothesis is true. We can’t go back in time to see what 
happened to the oversized lizards or to the hapless  sap lying on the carpet. The next step really is 
the key to hypothetical reasoning.  
 
4. Draw an implication  of the hypothesis  
 
We next draw one or more implications  of the hypothesis. This is where many students get 
confused, so we’re going to take this p art of hypothetical reasoning slowly and proceed 
thoroughly. We can say that H implies I (or I is implied by H) if and only if the occurrence of H 
guarantees that I takes place. As there are different levels of guarantees, there will be different 
levels of  strictness in implication. A logical implication will be the strictest. If “H implies I” is 
meant as a logical implication, then it is absolutely impossible for H to be true and I to be false. 
It would somehow result in a logical contradiction to say that  H is true and at the same time from 
the same perspective say that I is false. For instance, Ann’s having exactly three coins (H) 
implies that Ann has an odd number of coins (I). It is impossible for Ann to have exactly three 
coins and not to have an odd n umber of coins. Other examples of logical implications include:  
 
If Bob is taller than Sam, then Sam is shorter than Bob.  
If Maria is the sister of Juan, then Juan is the sibling of Maria.  
If Aarav is the father of Krishna, then Krishna is the child of Aar av. 
If Daria is older than Eva, and Eva is older than Sofia, then Daria is older than Sofia.  
If the rag is moist, then the rag is damp.  
If A and B are true, then B is true.  
If A is true, and B is true, then A and B are true.  
If all dogs are animals, then i t is false that some dogs are not animals.  
 
In each case above, if the first claim is true, it is logically impossible for the second claim to be 
false. There is a logical contradiction in saying otherwise. Claiming that Bob can be taller than 
Sam and that Sam can fail to be shorter than Bo b contradicts itself. Hypothetical reasoning, 
however, does not require quite this strict a level of implication. Consider the following 
implications (again presented as “If…, then…” statements):  
 
* If a small boy eats fi ve large hamburgers in one sitting, then he will afterwards feel full.  
* If a radio is tossed out of a high -flying airplane and falls to the ground, then it will break.  
* If a large meteorite lands on an animal, then that animal will be harmed.  
* If a man has his head cut off, then he will die.  
* If a dinosaur fails to eat for 1000 days straight, then it will starve to death.  
 
172 
 In each case, it is logically possible for the first part of the conditional statement to be true and 
the second part of the stateme nt to be false, but it is so incredibly unlikely that for all intents and 
purposes we can say that the second is pretty well guaranteed.  
 
Now we can come to the key point pertaining to hypothetical reasoning. An implication we draw 
from an hypothesis must meet two criteria: (i) the implication must be testable directly, and (ii) it 
must be pretty well guaranteed by the hypothesis. That is, we’ll not demand a logical 
implication , but for the process of hypothetical reasoning to continue effectively, the hypo thesis 
must give us extreme confidence that the implication will be true. We’ll discuss the first criterion 
shortly, but here are some hypotheses with suggested “implications” that are not truly 
implications. That is, the purported “implication” does not f ollow from the hypothesis; the 
hypothesis does not guarantee in any practical manner that the purported implication will obtain.  
 
* If brontosauruses used to live in what is today Bellevue, Washington, then we’d today find 
brontosaurus bones in every backy ard there.  
* If Bob killed the man lying on the floor, then Bob’s fingerprints will be on the knife in the 
man’s back.  
* If this afternoon is warm and sunny, then Sunny Shine will be tending her garden today.  
* If a bear messed up the campsite, then there will be bear fur all over the place.  
* If God exists, then my request offered in prayer will be granted.  
* If my request offered in prayer is not granted, then God does not exist.  
 
For an implication to do anything in hypothetical reasoning, we must be abl e to say confidently 
that if the hypothesis is true, then that lets us know that the implication is surely  true. The 
implication can’t just be consistent with the hypothesis; and we can’t be satisfied with saying 
that the implication might be true if the h ypothesis is true.  
 
**Practice Problems: Hypotheses and Implications  
For each hypothesis and implication suggested below, determine whether the purported 
implication is truly implied by that hypothesis (it need not be a logical implication  as defined 
abov e). 
 
1. H: A lion killed the dead wildebeest lying here before us. I: The wildebeest carcass will show 
signs of claw or teeth marks.  
2. H: The wind blew a tree over a power line causing the blackout in our house. I: Other houses 
nearby using the same power  line will exhibit blackouts, too.  
3. H: The maid killed the butler in the kitchen with a gun. I: The maid will admit to the killing.  
4. H: Your car won’t run because you are out of gasoline. I: The car will run after you fill the gas 
tank with gasoline.  
5. H: Your radio isn’t working because it’s not plugged in. I: By plugging the radio in, it will 
start working.  
6. H: This society is generally opposed to murder. I: People will never murder one another in this 
society.  
7. H: Jan studied for her logic test.  I: Jan did well on her logic test.  
173 
 8. H: Mehdi moments ago swallowed the packet containing the secret formula. I: If we looked 
inside Mehdi’s body, we’d find the packet.  
9. H: Fatima is a college student who wants to be an anthropologist. I: Fatima will m ajor in 
Anthropology.  
10. H: Malaya  is a woman. I: Malaya  wears what she believes to be traditional women’s 
clothing.  
 
Answer:  
1. Implication    6. Not an implication  
2. Implication    7. Not an implication  
3. Not an implication   8. Implication  
4. Implicatio n   9. Not an implication  
5. Implication    10. Not an implication  
 
5. Test the implication  
 
As we said, there are two character traits any good implication must have in hypothetical 
reasoning. For all practical purposes, the implication must be guaranteed by the hypothesis, and 
it must be testable directly. It’s because the hypothesis itself cannot be tested directly that we 
even go through the hypothetical method process. If an implication we draw is not itself testable, 
then we are back in the woeful stat e where we started. Of course, we might draw implications 
that are guaranteed by the hypotheses, but which  are not themselves testable. Imagine the 
following line of reasoning that does so:  
 
“You want to know why the dinosaurs died? I’ll tell you! My hypot hesis is that ancient aliens 
landed on Earth and sucked all the cosmic vital energy from the behemoths, leaving them dead 
on the ground where they lay. An implication to my hypothesis, is —of course —that these aliens 
understood a lot about cosmic vital ener gy.” 
 
Aside from the many problems with the hypothesis itself (as an hypothesis), the implication that 
is drawn is not testable (although it is likely guaranteed by the hypothesis). There is nothing we 
can do to verify or falsify that ancient aliens knew a  lot about this so -called “cosmic vital 
energy.” Imagine a slightly revised pronouncement:  
 
 “You want to know why the dinosaurs died? I’ll tell you! My hypothesis is that ancient aliens 
landed on Earth and injected the dinosaurs with a virus that gave the  behemoths arthritis, and 
then not being able to move easily, the dinosaurs died. An implication to my hypothesis, is —of 
course —that the bones of these dinosaurs will show traces of arthritis.”  
 
Here at least we have an implication that is testable. We can  dig up dinosaur bones, and see if 
they show signs of arthritis (a process that is quite do -able in many cases). Whether the bones do 
or do not show such signs will tell us something important about the hypothesis. So, we may not 
be able to test directly t he hypothesis itself, but for hypothetical reasoning to work, we must be 
able to test to see if the implication  (which is different from the hypothesis) will come out to be 
true of false.  
174 
  
6. Draw a conclusion  
 
If the test of the im plication comes out nega tive (i.e.,  false), that tells us one thing abou t the 
hypothesis. If the test of  the implication comes out positive ( i.e., true), that tells us something 
else about the hypothesis. Let’s think abstractly for a moment. Let H stand for the hypothesis, 
and I stand for the implication we draw from it. Then after testing the implication, let’s imagine 
we get a negative result; the implication turns out to be false.  
 
If H, then I [that’s the implication we draw from the hypothesis]  
Not-I [the test of the implicat ion comes out negative]  
 
What should we conclude? The deductive propositional logic pattern of Modus Tollens tells us:  
 
If H, then I  
Not-I 
Thus, not -H 
 
If I is truly an implication of H, and if I  tests out as false, then Modus Tollens tells us that the 
hypothesis must be false. We thus have used hypothetical reasoning to disprove an hypothesis. 
For instance:  
 
If a meteorite hit the Earth causing dust that blocked enough sunlight to kill plants and starve 
dinosaurs, then there should be uniform a layer of du st (allowing for changes in geographical 
topography) underground around the world. [For the sake of this example, let’s pretend that this 
is a good implication.] The chief scientist in the process gets underpaid graduate students to go 
around the world and  dig holes looking for that layer of dust. And now let’s imagine that no such 
layer of dust is found. What’s the result? Well, if the hypothesis is true, there should be a layer of 
dust that can be found. But there is no such layer of dust. So the hypothes is must be false.  
 
Another example: The detective hypothesizes that Andy killed the man on the floor by picking 
up a knife and stabbing the man with it. One implication would be that Andy has the strength to 
use a knife. The detective goes to Andy to ask h im some questions, and finds out that Andy has 
been in a coma for the past month, and could not have used the knife. The detective concludes 
that his hypothesis about Andy killing the man with a knife must be rejected.  
 
Hypothetical reasoning is thus prett y adept at disconfirming, falsifying, or ruling out bad 
hypotheses. That is, this line of reasoning is a powerful tool in showing that a theory or 
hypothesis should be rejected. Things are little different when we use it to confirm hypotheses or 
to show th at they are true. Consider the following abstract scenario:  
 
If H, then I [we draw an implication from our hypothesis]  
I [the implication tests positively, that is, the implication comes out to be true]  
 
What can we conclude here? That the hypothesis is tr ue? That would look like this:  
175 
  
If H, then I  
I 
Thus, H  
 
But this is an example of the formal fallacy known as Affirming the Consequent. Any argument 
fitting this pattern will be invalid. The first two claims do not guarantee the conclusion; that is, it 
is possible for the first two claims to be true and the conclusion false. So —and here’s a subtle 
point about much of the science and police work based on hypothetical reasoning —hypothetical 
reasoning can disprove an hypothesis, but it can’t really prove an hy pothesis to be true.  
 
That said, hypothetical reasoning can give use good reason to be happy with a n hypothesis. We 
might say that if the procedure is used well, it can confirm an hypothesis. Going back to the 
dinosaur/meteorite hypothesis/implication, if those underpaid graduate students dug holes all 
over the world and did find a uniform layer of dust, that would not prove the meteorite 
hypothesis to be true, but it would confirm it somewhat. It would give us reason to think that we 
might be on the right track. So what should we do then? Come up with another implication!  
 
If the full meteorite hypothesis is true, then there should be an extra thick layer of dinosaur bones 
near the layer of dust, because it’s the dust that was the indirect cause of the dino saurs’ death. So 
the primary investigating scientist sends her graduate -student minions out to re -dig those holes 
and to look this time for an extra thick layer of dinosaur bones. Eureka! They find them! The 
scientist is really happy about her hypothesis a t this point, because two things the hypothesis 
pointed to showed up to be true. Can she further confirm her hypothesis and get even more grant 
money? Yes! She needs to draw yet another implication. Hm. “If my hypothesis is true,” she 
might reason, “there should also be an extra thick layer of plant fossils near the extra thick layer 
of dinosaur bones we just found, since the plants’ death is what caused the dinosaurs to starve. 
Minions! Dig once again!!” If the now weary graduate students find the expected  plant fossils, 
then that adds further confirmation to the hypothesis. This procedure will never deductively 
prove the hypothesis to be true (for that would engage the hypothesis’s proponents in the fallacy 
of Affirming the Consequent), but it can provide so much confirmation that only drooling idiots 
will say, “Well, you haven’t proven your point; and besides, it’s just a theory .” It’s responses like 
this that can drive otherwise stable scientists to drink.  
 
Oh, if it were only that easy…  
 
…life would be p leasant, carefree, and long, instead of nasty, brutish, and short. You didn’t 
really think science was this straightforward , did you? If it were, someone would have 
discovered a cure for every form of cancer by now, and we’d understand how your le ast favor ite 
U.S. P resident got elected. We’ve already hinted at many potential problems in using 
hypothetical reasoning. (i) We may be dumb as dirt and not even understand the question 
pertaining to the puzzling phenomenon. (ii) We may not know enough about the wo rld or have 
enough intellectual creativity to come up with a viable hypothesis answering the question. (iii) 
We may be unable to see what would be implied by our hypothesis. (iv) The “implication” we 
come up with may not be truly implied (or guaranteed) by  our hypothesis.  (v) The implication 
176 
 we come up with may be useless because it’ s not testable. (vi) The underpaid graduate students 
we use to test our good implication may do poor work (due to laziness, inebriation, human error, 
or having slacked off duri ng their training in lab science classes) and not get accurate test data. 
(vii) We may overstate our results by saying that we’ve proved  our hypothesis to be true when 
all we really should have said is that we’ve confirmed  it.  
 
The additional complexity w e now need to understand pertains to the last part of the process in 
which we draw a conclusion from the results of our test of the implication. So far, we’ve been 
thinking in fairly simple and simplistic terms:  
 
If H, then I     or   If H, then I  
I       Not-I 
Thus, H is confirmed       Thus, not -H 
 
On the left, we conclude that we’ve confirmed our hypothesis; on the right we conclude that 
we’ve disproved our hypothesis.  Neither assessment is quite correct because the vast majority of 
philosophically intere sting hypotheses are complex critters consisting of more than one claim. 
Earlier, when we were looking into the enviable character traits of being internally consistent 
and simple  we noted that many hypotheses make more than one claim. More often than not,  the 
hypothesis is actually a conjunction of claims such as A+B+C+D+E. The dinosaur/meteorite 
hypothesis had about that many parts to it. So, in a sense, H= (A+B+C+D+E ). So, what is 
actually happening in hypothetical reasoning is this:  
 
If A+B+C+D+E, then I    or  If A+B+C+D+E, then I  
I       Not-I 
Thus, A+B+C+D+E is confirmed     Thus, not -(A+B+C+D+E ) 
 
Consider the line of reasoning above and to the right. What is it that will make you  reject as false 
A+B+C+D+E  as a whole? If any one or more parts of it are f alse, then you’d say that the 
conjunction  (an “and” statement) as a whole is false. For instance, figure out when you would 
agree or disagree with the four statements below as wholes:  
 
1. Elephants fly, Oregon is a state in the USA, and 2+2=4.  
2. Mermaids exist, Oregon is south of California, and the Seattle Mariners are a baseball team.  
3. Paris Hilton is a space alien, the Earth has three Moons, and 2 -1=1. 
4. Circles are round, Ronald Reagan was a U.S. president, and 2+3=5.  
 
You disagree with numbers 1, 2 , and 3 because there is at least one claim in the conjunctions that 
is false. The only way a conjunction can be true is if each of its parts (i.e., its conjuncts ) is true, 
as with number 4. So, if a conjunction is found to be false, then all we really kno w at that point is 
that one or more of its elements is false. So for the use of hypothetical reasoning above and to the 
right, all we can say is that we’ve disproved A+B+C+D+E . But it might be that only A (or B, or 
C, or D, or E, or A+B , or A+B+C , etc.) is  false. Actually, the key part of the hypothesis might be 
true, and some relatively unimportant part of the hypothesis is false. The point is that we have 
177 
 only gotten started in narrowing down the core problem of our hypothesis. We might still have 
hope th at the key element is true, regardless of what we found out above to the right.  
 
An analogous problem lies in using hypothetical reasoning as we did above to the left where we 
concluded that we’d confirmed our hypothesis. Since Affirming the Consequent is an invalid 
inference, we are not justified in saying that the truth of I confirms all of A+B+C+D+E . It may 
be that part of this complex hypothesis is enough to guarantee I, and that’s why the results of the 
test on I came out positive. I being true really only confirms something  about H (i.e., A, or B, or 
C, or A+B , or A+B+C , etc.), but further work is needed to confirm that H as a whole is true or 
that only certain parts of H are true.  
 
So it may be overstating things to even say that the hypothetical meth od disproves or confirms 
much of anything. Still, it’s a powerful tool for considering hypotheses, and if we pay enough 
attention to the details, we can warrant enough confidence in an hypothesis to make looking 
elsewhere for others a seemingly pointless t ask. Sometimes rational inquiry can give you enough 
to send a rocket to the Moon and have it land safely in exactly the intended spot, without 
deductively proving any part of the inquiry and discovery process along the way. Such is life 
with inductive reas oning.  
 
**Thinking Problems: Hypothetical Reasoning  
1. Your desktop computer suddenly stops working. Think of an hypothesis to explain this 
phenomenon, and draw one good, testable implication to this hypothesis.  
2. Imagine that you just baked a dozen choco late chip cookies, placed them atop a counter, and 
told your precocious five -year-old son to stay away from them until after dinner. You go upstairs 
to print some more re -election fliers for your Senate race, and hear a crash in the kitchen. You 
run down t o find a half dozen warm cookies and the plate smashed on the floor. Your son sits in 
the corner of the kitchen by the swinging door, and says, “Mommy, a ghost came in, ate some 
cookies, and dropped the plate. He just left.” How might you use hypothetical reasoning to 
determine what really happened?  
3. Read about planet Neptune, and briefly explain how the method of hypothetical reasoning 
played a role in its discovery. ( http://en.wikipedia.o rg/wiki/Discovery_of_Neptune )  
4. Read the Sherlock Holmes short story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle titled, “The Adventure of 
the Redheaded League.” Briefly explain one way Sherlock Holmes uses hypothetical reasoning 
in the story. ( http://168.144.50.205/221bcollection/canon/redh.htm )  
 
Answers:  
1. Many good responses are possible. For instance: H1: the building’s power is suddenly shut 
down. I: the room lights won’t work either. H2: you accid ently unplugged your computer from 
the wall. I: the plug will not be plugged in.  
2. Multiple scenarios are possible. For instance: Puzzling problem: missing cookies [we might 
tackle one puzzling problem at a time; the breakage of the plate is a separate pu zzling problem, 
although it’s probably related to the loss of the cookies]. Hypothesis: the son got up on the 
counter and ate some cookies. Implication: the son would have cookie crumbs and melted 
chocolate in his mouth. Test: the mother looks in the son’s  mouth and finds no cookie crumbs or 
178 
 chocolate.  Results: Her hypothesis is disproved, as the kid did not have enough time to rinse his 
mouth clean; the missing cookies must be due to something other than the son eating them.  
3. Puzzling problem: Uranus ha d strange, unexpected perturbations in its orbit. Hypothesis: an 
unknown planet existed whose gravitational pull was affecting the orbit of Uranus. Implication: 
this previously unknown planet would be in spot X in the night sky at a particular time. Test: a 
planet was found in exactly the spot predicted. Results: the “new planet” hypothesis was 
confirmed.  
4. Multiple answers are possible. Look for a specific question Holmes is trying to answer. He 
will then form an hypothesis, draw an implication form it, a nd then test that implication. Why, 
for instance, do you think he was tapping his stick on the ground outside the Redheaded 
League’s office?  
 
**Practice Problems: Hypothetical Reasoning  
Are the following claims true or false?  
 
1. An hypothesis can have at most one implication.  
2. Only one hypothesis may accurately explain a given puzzling problem.  
3. In hypothetical reasoning, the  hypothesis must be testable directly.  
4. In hypothetical reasoning, the implication must be testable directly.  
5. In hypothetica l reasoning, the test of an hypothesis will either confirm or disprove it.  
6. In hypothetical reasoning, the test of an implication will either confirm or disprove a simple, 
one-part hypothesis.  
7. In hypothetical reasoning, the puzzling problem must imply  the hypothesis.  
8. If an hypothesis says a liquid is an acid, then an implication would be that placing blue litmus 
paper in the liquid will cause it to turn red.  
9. The person forming  the hypothesis and implication must be the person performing the test on 
the implication.  
10. One’s worldview can impact what hypotheses one is willing to entertain in answering a 
puzzling problem.  
 
Answers:  
1. False   6. True  
2. False   7. False  
3. False   8. True  
4. True   9. False  
5. False   10. True  
179 
 Chapter 13: Definitions a nd Analyses  
 
Far too often when people are debating the answer to some question, they end up talking at cross 
purposes. Someone listening in might say, “Oh, they’re just wrapped up in semantics” or “They 
aren’t even talking about the same thing.” The likel y problem in this debate is that each side is 
using the same word but meaning something different by it. Imagine a dispute about God’s 
existence in which one woman is referring to the supremely perfect being of traditional theism 
while the other is talking  about a lesser being like Zeus of ancient Greece. The two interlocutors 
could bound on indefinitely without ever gaining ground, all because neither took the time to 
define her terms. Definitions thus are an important part of reasoning, and are worth expl oring in 
some detail.  
 
Definitions are usually desired for a word . We might, for instance, want to know someone’s 
definition (or meaning) of the word ‘God’. Once we understand each other, we can then move 
forward to examine reasons for believing in the exi stence or non -existence of such a being. If 
Sue is trying to demonstrate that a supremely perfect being exists, and Mandy is trying to show 
that a lesser god (like Zeus) does not, their conversation will be surreal at best.  
 
Definitions assist in avoiding two problems in rational conversations: ambiguity and vagueness. 
A term can be ambiguous  when it has multiple  clear meanings. The word ‘bat’, for instance, may 
refer to a lathed piece of lumber intended to smack baseballs, or it can refer to a cave -dwellin g 
flying mammal. If someone uses the word ‘bat’ in a conversation and I cannot detect the 
intended meaning, I may need to ask for a definition.  
 
Also, some words are vague ; they have a generally understood meaning, but their specific 
meaning remains unclea r. Imagine someone explaining that bonsai are not tall trees.  (We refer 
here to the Japanese art form of pruned trees growing in small pots or trays.) The word “tall” 
here is vague. We know generally speaking what it means to be tall, but what counts as “ tall” in 
the context of bonsai? If the bonsai enthusiast explains further that by “tall” he refers to trees 
over six feet in height, the vagueness dissipates, and the conversation or debate may continue 
with all involved knowing what the other is talking a bout.  
 
The word ‘poor’ can be both ambiguous and vague, as in “Shahd is poor.” Are we saying that 
Shahd is poor in spirit? Poor in skill or quality? Poor financially? Let’s disambiguate the word, 
and say that we are referring to financial status. She lacks  money in some sense. Still, the word is 
vague, as the specific meaning remains unclear. Compared to many villagers of poorer countries, 
Shahd might be quite rich, but compared to Bill Gates, she might be woefully impoverished. If I 
ask, “What do you mean by ‘poor’?” I’d be asking for clarification. “I mean she has less annual 
income that 90 percent of the people in the town she lives in,” the other might  reply. “Okay,” I 
can continue,  “I now know what you mean by ‘poor’ in this context.”  
 
Let’s also introd uce some vocabulary. A definition is made up of two things: the definiendum  
(the word to be defined) and the definiens  (the words doing the defining).  
 
Definition = Definiendum + Definiens  
180 
  
An example of a definition is, “The word ‘ice’ means frozen water. ” Here, “Ice” is the 
definiendum, and “frozen water” works as the definiens.  
 
Another technical nicety pertains to proper use of quotation marks. If we are quoting someone or 
using a word, we’ll use double quotation marks (unless we are in a British or Bri tish-aligned 
country, in which case we’ll do everything backwards compared to how the USA does it). Note 
that in the USA, periods and commas are placed before (i.e., inside)  double quotation marks. If 
we are referring to or mentioning a word (not quoting i t), then we use single quotation marks. 
For instance, if we want to say that the word ‘snorkel’ has seven letters in it, we’d punctuate the 
word exactly as we just did. Also —in the USA —when we use single quotation marks, commas 
and periods are properly pla ced after  the quotation mark . For the following examples pay 
attention to the placement of quotation marks, periods, and commas:  
 
* Bob said, “I love snorkels!”  
* Sally said, “Snorkel.”  
* Sally said, “I love to say the word ‘snorkel’.”  
* Sally said, “Bob w hispered with glee, ‘Snorkel.’”  
* Hamza said, “I use a snorkel when swimming.”  
* “I too like snorkels,” Youssef said.  
* Bob said, “Snorkels are fun to use”; later he said, “They are particularly fun to use in the 
ocean.”  
* The word ‘snorkel’ has seven lett ers in it. 
 
Quotation marks are used so haphazardly, what with newspapers throwing punctuation out the 
window in grappling with the confinements of the fourth -grade reading level of their intended 
readership, and of the narrow size of their text columns. B ritish magazine and book editors will 
do one thing, Americans something else, and far too many don’t seem to care. Philosophers and 
linguists pay the most careful attention to these things, so it’s little wonder that students have 
seen a dizzying variance in punctuation styles. In this text, too, there has been an effort to keep 
things simple, and to use double quotation marks (or italics) to quote, set apart, or emphasize 
words or phrases. For the most part, this text will continue in this vein, but the ri gors of critical 
thinking  as it relates to definitions demand that we be at least aware of the issue.  
 
Purposes of Definitions  
 
There are many reasons for wanting clarification on a word or phrase. Let’s consider the 
following purposes of definitions:  
 
Lexical 
Precising  
Stipulative  
Persuasive  
Theoretical  
 
181 
 Lexical Purpose  
 
A lexical definition provides the general meaning of a word or phrase as understood by the 
majority of ordinary people. Dictionaries are sometimes called “lexicons,” and attempt to 
provide  exactly this meaning. If I want to know what most people mean by the word ‘snorkel’, I 
can look in a dictionary and find something akin to the following:  
 
1: any of various devices (as for an underwater swimmer) to assist in breathing air while 
underwater ; 2: a tube housing air intake and exhaust pipes for a submarine’s diesel engine.  
 
If there are multiple definitions, then the first listed in the dictionary will be the most popular or 
most common (at least at the time of that edition’s publication). Lexi cal definitions thus give a 
general, sometimes overly simple meaning understood by most “people on the street.” If you do 
not know what a word means, a lexical definition may be enough to give you a basic facility in 
using the word. Meanings can, of course , change over time, and that is why —at least in the USA 
where language tends to be rather fluid and ever -changing —it’s important to have access to the 
latest edition of a good dictionary. The most common meaning of ‘pot’, ‘lid’, and ‘gay’ may 
have meant on e set of things 100 years ago, but it’s quite possible the most common meanings 
have shifted today.  We thus can be mistaken in our belief about a lexical definition, and reliable 
dictionaries help us understand the meaning words more accurately.  
 
Precising  Purpose  
 
Sometimes we have a general understanding of what a word means, but need a more precise 
definition of it in a particular circumstance. Here is where we’d want a precising  definition. Such 
a definition has as its purpose to make a generally unders tood meaning more specific to a 
particular situation. Precising definitions often have a clause pointing out their precising nature: 
“For the purposes of X , Y means Z.”  
 
For instance, we all know what it means to be financially poor , but imagine the proble m if a 
bank acquires access to $50,000,000 for loans to “poor” people, and advertised the opportunity 
by saying, “Loans available to the poor!” One person in the bank’s Bellevue, Washington 
neighborhood might take himself to be poor, when he’s actually fil thy rich compared to many 
people around the world, but impoverished compared to some of the upper -level Microsoft 
administrators living in Medina on Lake Washington. What t he bank needs to do is provide a 
precising definition of “poor,” and say, perhaps in  small print, that “For the purposes of this bank 
loan, ‘poor’ means having a net annual family income of no more than $10,000.” Now we know 
what ‘poor’ means in this specific situation.  
 
Sometimes a word has more than one meaning, and we need a precising definition to tell us the 
context for the particular intended meaning. The word ‘strike’, for instance, has a variety of 
meanings pertaining to baseball pitches, bowling scores, labor disputes, the lighting of a match, 
or a blow to the face with a fist. If  Theresa simply says, “A strike is a good thing,” we’ll not 
know if we should agree with her or not. But if she defines her terms as follows, then all is clear: 
“A strike —in the context of a miner looking for gold —is a good thing, at least for the miner.”  
182 
  
Precising definitions sometimes overlap with lexical ones, as a word might have multiple 
ordinary meanings, but each is used in a distinct circumstance. The lexical definitions may need 
to provide context for each partial definition. The lexical definitio n of ‘strike’ might say, in part, 
“1: in the context of labor disputes, an organized halt of labor; 2: in the context of baseball, a 
pitch that is delivered past the batter over the plate, below the batter’s shoulders, and above the 
batter’s knees…” It’s n o surprise that people might have more than one purpose for a definition.  
 
Stipulative Purpose  
 
A stipulative definition is offered when there is a need for a new word to name a new or selected 
object, or when a word with an established meaning is given a  new usage. For instance, if I 
invent a machine that washes dishes and tell s me the time, I get to choose what to call it, and I 
might stipulate that it be called a “washclock.” If zoologist Barry has discovered how to mate a 
horse with a gorilla (even thou gh none of us can think of a good reason to do so), and the tender 
moment produces offspring, Barry gets to stipulate what to call the ensuing critter s. Perhaps he’ll 
call them “hors illas.” That would be a stipulation on his part. Or Barbara could decide t hat she 
wants to call the dan delions in her front lawn “imps. ” We can’t say that she’s wrong. The word 
‘imp’ may already have an established meaning (an imp is a devilish little creature), but if 
Barbara wants to stipulate that that’s what she means by ‘im p’, then that’s her business.  
 
In a sense, stipulative definitions can’t be wrong. If Stan decides to call the wrinkles in his 
elbows “glips,” there’s no one who can tell him not to do so. Any use of language may be 
counter to accepted meaning, but if Stan  wants to call those fissures glips, he can. He stipulated 
it; he decided that that’s what he wished to call them. If, moreover, the word catches on and 
works its way into day -to-day parlance, then if the editors of dictionaries are doing their job well, 
the lexical definiens of ‘glip’ may very well become “elbow wrinkles.” That is, what started out 
as a rather arbitrary stipulation can become so popular as to have a commonly shared meaning 
ripe for a lexical definition.  
 
Persuasive Purpose  
 
If what we wish  to do w ith a definition is to  persuade emotively someone to a given position, 
then we want a persuasive  definition. Persuasive definitions use emotive, affective language to 
try to sway people to one side or another. They do not usually tell us what peopl e normally mean 
by the word, so they are not lexical. Nor are they usually new words selected for a new or 
subjectively selected object , so they are not stipulative . Usually the person of fering the definition 
is trying to avoid using logic or evidence to c onvince another; he’s trying to stir emotions 
(positively or negatively) so that the other will feel good or bad about the thing being defined. 
For instance:  
 
* ‘Abortion’ refers to the  senseless slaughter of innocent babies for self -centered motives.  
* ‘Abortion ’ refers to  the natural right of all women to experience liberty and self -autonomy.  
 
183 
 Well, who would want to slaughter an innocent baby? And who would not support women’s 
rights to autonomy? But neither of these “definitions” explains what abortion is. They provide no 
cognitive information; they simply stir emotions. Note the use of words and phrases that we 
associate with bad (or good) things. A more informative definition would use language that is 
emotionally neutral. Here are a couple more exampl es: 
 
* The word ‘c hess’ refers to  a silly and puerile game fit only for the socially inept  
* The word ‘c hess’ refers to  a noble game fostering the highest intellect, uniting cultures , and 
giving rise to clear, methodical thinking . 
 
Theoretical Purpose  
 
Finally, a theoretical definition attempts to provide a developed, full understanding of what a 
word means. Usually, theoretical definitions are desired when the meaning as embraced by most 
“people on the street” is insufficient. Philosophically or scientific ally complex words often 
require such definitions. Philosophers, for instance, will often discus s the nature of “moral 
goodness.” “What does ‘morally good’ mean?” they might ask. Appealing to a dictionary will 
hardly help, nor can a philosopher simply say,  “I stipulate that ‘moral goodness’ means X! 
There, the conversation is over.”  
 
Theoretical definitions are an attempt at giving a true, informative understanding of potentially 
complex words. From the philosophy of Britain’s John Stuart Mill (1806 -1873), we might define 
‘good act’ as an act that maximizes happiness for all involved. The German philosopher 
Immanuel Kant (1724 -1804) might have defined it as that which is consistent with the 
Categorical Imperative. Both of these definitions need explanation t o be fully informative, but 
that’s what a theoretical definition aims to do.  
 
Theoretical definitions of words referring to philosophically interesting concepts are decidedly 
open to intelligent debate. There have been a number of viable attempts at defini ng ‘good act’ 
over the millennia. Such debates are more often over the better analysis of a concept than over 
the meaning of the related word, so perhaps we should defer further discussion along these lines 
until we look at analyses more closely.  
 
If a wor d refers to a fairly simple item, like a square, then a theoretical definition may be quite 
similar to a lexical definition: ‘Square’ means an enclosed, planar geometric figure with four 
equal sides and four right angles. But try getting a definition of an  electron from people walking 
the streets, and it will surely be unserviceable for a physicist studying subatomic particles. Such 
scientists need a richer, more informative definition than will likely be found in a lexicon. We’ll 
revisit the deeper needs o f theoretical definitions shortly when we discuss analysis.  
 
**Practice Problems: Purposes of Definitions  
For each definition below, determine whether its single clearest purpose is lexical, precising, 
stipulative, persuasive, or theoretical.  
 
184 
 1. ‘Crosshai r’ means a fine wire or thread in the focus of the eyepiece of an optical instrument 
used as a reference line in the field or for marking the instrumental axis.  
2. ‘Golf’ refers to a ridiculous “sport ” in which  grown men dress up like idiots and chase a li ttle 
ball around o n overly fertilized field s of unnatural grass.  
3. Bernadette just developed a new variety of cannabis. She’s going to call it ‘Bellevue 
Blitzkrieg’.  
4. ‘Magnetic’ refers to a magnet’s moment (also called magnetic dipole moment and usually  
denoted μ) that is a vector  characterizing the magnet’s overall magnetic properties. For a bar 
magnet, the direction of the magnetic moment points from the magnet’s south pole to its north 
pole, and the magnitude relates to how strong and how far apart th ese poles are. In SI units, the 
magnetic moment is specified in terms of A •m2. 
5. ‘Magnetic’ means 1. a. Of or relating to magnetism or magnets.  b. Having the properties of a 
magnet.  c. Capable of being magnetized or attracted by a magnet.  d. Operating by means of 
magnetism ; 2. Relating to the magnetic poles of the earth ; 3. Having an unusual power or ability 
to attract . 
6. Euthanasia is the cold -hearted murder of helpless souls who can’t cry for help.  
7. For the purposes of a baseball game, the word ‘pitch ’ refers to the throwing of a ball by the 
pitcher to the batter.  
8. The Chinese philosopher Kongzi (551 -479 BC) used the word ren to refer to the fullness of 
developed human nature i n which people can and wish to emp athize with others, and wish to 
seek aft er the well -being of others.  
9. “Motion sickness” means sickness induced by motion (as in travel by air, car, or ship) and 
characterized by nausea.  
10. The word ‘pin’, in golf, refers to the flag pole placed in each hole’s cup.  
11. “To make my discussion s impler, I’m going to refer to contributory causes as ‘INUS 
conditions’.”  
12.  ‘Strife’ means a bitter, sometimes violent conflict or dissention.  
13. ‘Communism’ refers to a godless ideology festering in intellectually feeble countries and 
oozing its way to  mindless, lazy masses.  
14. A ‘valid’ argument is one in which it is impossible for the premises to be true and at the same 
time and from the same perspective the conclusion be false.  
15. ‘Knowledge’ means adequately justified cognitive assent to a proposi tion that corresponds 
truly with the world.  
 
Answers:  
1. Lexical   6. Persuasive   11. Stipulative  
2. Persuasive   7. Precising   12. Lexical  
3. Stipulative   8. Theoretical   13. Persuasive  
4. Theoretical   9. Lexical   14. Theoretical  
5. Lexical   10. Precising   15.Theoretical  
 
Types of Definitions  
 
Definitions that attempt to provide the cognitive meaning of a word fall into two basic camps: 
extensional  and intensional . An extensional (aka denotative) definition provides examples or a 
185 
 list of members of the group  referred to by the word being defined. The list might be complete —
as with “‘Highest mountain in the world’ means Mt. Everest” or “‘Ocean’ means the Atlantic, 
Pacific, and Indian”; the list might instead be partial, as with “‘Country’ is something like Per u, 
Angola, or France” or “‘Baseball team’ means something like the Giants, Mariners, Yankees, or 
White Sox.”  
 
Intensional (aka connotative) definitions provide a description, or character traits of the thing 
referred to by the word being defined. For insta nce, 
 
* ‘Ice’ means frozen water.  
* ‘Wife’ means married woman.  
* ‘Jolly’ means jovial.  
* ‘Philosophy’ comes from two Greek words  together  meaning love of wisdom.  
 * ‘Hot’, for spas, refers to the water’s ability to raise the mercury in a thermometer to ov er 95 F.  
 
Here the definitions are attempting to provide the meaning of the definiendum. With extensional 
definitions, all we get are examples, or a list of what counts as being a member of the 
definiendum. Examples may help, but they do not really provide  an explanation of what the word 
means. At best, they may serve as illustrations for the meaning conveyed by a more informative 
intensional definition.  
 
There are at least three kinds of extensional definitions:  
 
Demonstrative definitions  
Enumerative defin itions  
Definitions by sub -class  
 
 A demonstrative (aka ostensive) definition simply points to an example of the thing referred to 
by the word being defined. If a woman wishes to provide a demons trative definition of ‘chair’, 
she might point to or direct ou r attention toward a chair. “What does ‘chair’ mean?” we might 
ask. She points to one, and ideally we nod in understanding. “Oh, it’s one of those things.” She 
could also draw a picture of a chair and direct our attention to that. If limber enough, and per haps 
majoring in performance art, she might hunch down , make herself look like  a chair , and point to 
herself . 
 
A more common extensional approach is the offer of enumerative  definitions. These provide 
specific, named examples of the things the word refers to. For instance:  
 
* ‘Baseball player’ is someone like Willie Mays, Babe Ruth, or Hank Aaron.  
* ‘U.S. State’ means something like Alabama, Oregon, Indiana, or Hawaii.  
* ‘Mountain’ refers to things like Mt. Si, Mt. Rainier, and Mt. Everest.  
 
A more general extensional approach is to use a definition by sub -class . Here, we don’t provide 
specifically named examples; we instead provide classes or groups that exemplify the thing 
referred to by the word we’re trying to define. For instance:  
186 
  
* ‘Baseball player’ i s something like a second baseman, an outfielder, or a pitcher.  
* ‘College major’ is a focused study in a reas like psychology, philosophy , or chemistry . 
* ‘Machine’ means something like a computer, automobile, threshing mill, or radio.  
 
Extensional definit ions, again, offer no explanation of a word. Examples may help illustrate a 
more informative definition, but if you really do not know what the word ‘mountain’ means, 
hearing that it is something like Mt. Si, Mt. Rainier, or Mt. Everest could just as easil y tell you 
that ‘mountain’ means something people climb on, or something with rocks and trees on it, or 
something found on maps, or something tall. In a day -to-day setting, an extensional definition 
may be all we need to get a basic idea of what a word is likely to mean, and we can usually ask 
for clarification if we need more information. It’s with intensional definitions, however, that the 
most cognitive information is conveyed, and that’s the main purpose of most definitions.  
 
There are many ways of atte mpting to convey the meaning of a word. Some are more useful in 
some contexts; others are more useful in other contexts. Let’s examine the following kinds of 
intensional definitions:  
 
Etymological definitions  
Operational definitions  
Synonymous definitions  
Analytical definitions  
 
An etymological definition appeals to the etymological roots of a word or phrase t o be defined, 
explains what it  mean s in the original language, and hopes that will help people understand the 
present meaning of the word. Many words used in English, for instance, have roots in Latin, 
Greek, Sanskrit, or Arabic. So if we wish to define ‘ignition’, we might say “‘Ignition’ comes 
from the Sanskrit word ‘Agni’, which is the name of the Hindu fire god.” Other examples of 
etymological defin itions include the following:  
 
* ‘Gymnasium’ comes from two Greek words meaning place of naked training.  
* ‘Karma’ comes from the Sanskrit verb kr, which has the double meaning of to do and to make.  
* ‘Pornography’ comes from the Greek word pornographos , which means depicting prostitutes.  
* ‘Algebra’ comes from the Arabic word al-jabr, which means completing or restoring broken 
parts.  
 
Etymological definitions can be interesting, and they can give some insight (historical or 
otherwise) into a word’s use and  meaning, but they often are of limited use when the primary 
goal is to convey today’s meaning as used in ordinary or technically precise discussion. Every 
philosophy instructor feels compelled to tell his or her class that the topic under discussion 
comes  from the Greek words phileo and sophia , and that Philosophy is thus the love of wisdom. 
But does “love of wisdom” really do much to explain what students will be doing in a 
philosophy class for the next ten weeks? And what about the meaning of ‘gymnasium’ ? It could 
put a whole new slant on co -ed PE.  
 
187 
 Operational  definitions provide a test by which to determine if something is accurately referred 
to by the word being defined. For instance, if we wanted to define ‘hot’ in the context of ironing, 
we could say  “‘Hot’ —in the context of an iron used for pressing clothes —refers to a temperature 
high enough that when you lick your finger and quickly touch the iron the iron sizzles.” Other 
examples include:  
 
* Peanut oil is ‘hot’ in a wok when it begins to shimmer a nd just before it starts to smoke.  
* A liquid is ‘acidic’ if blue litmus paper turns red when it touches the liquid.  
* ‘Passing’ means —in the context of Smith’s Logic class —receiving a GPA of 0.85 or better on 
the tests.  
* ‘Tall enough’ for this roller coa ster means you stand above the hand held out by this wooden 
figure.  
 
A synonymous definition provides a synonym for the definiendum. As long as the person asking 
for clarification of a word understands the synonym, such a definition can be of practical use . For 
example:  
 
* ‘Physician’ means doctor.  
* ‘Damp’ means moist.  
* ‘Arid’ means dry.  
* ‘Jocular’ means jovial.  
 
World language students are often quite satisfied with synonymous definitions. Oftentimes, 
though, a word referring to a complex thing may not have an exact synonym in the language 
used. We’d be hard pressed to find exact, accurate synonyms for ‘love’, ‘justice’, and ‘time’; and 
if we did find one, it may not be of much help, since if people do not know what the original 
word means, they may not know what the synonym means either.  
 
The most informative type of intensional definition is what we can call analytical , as it gives an 
analysis of what the term means. Finally, among all the types of definitions we’ve looked at so 
far, this one attempts t o explain accurately what characterizes the things referred to by the word 
being defined. A common, effective, and highly informative way of doing this is to provide the 
genus  and difference  of the word. The genus refers to the general kind of thing the wo rd refers to. 
For instance, consider, “‘Skyscraper’ means tall building.” Here “building” is the genus , as that 
word refers to the general kind of thing a skyscraper is. But what kind of building? An igloo? A 
mud hut? A doghouse? A two -story apartment? No,  skyscrapers are tall buildings. “Tall” here 
functions as the difference  in the definiens. Scientists use the method of genus and difference to 
name animals and plants. The genus points to the kind of thing they are, and the difference 
differentiates them from all the others within that genus. Of course the word ‘tall’ can be vague, 
so further elaboration may be necessary, but we now have a basic cognitive  understanding of 
what the word ‘skyscraper’ means, and this is far more than extensional or other int ensional 
definitions are likely to do for us.  
 
Both the genus and the difference may contain multiple traits. “‘Son’ means male offspring” has 
only one trait (and one word) per genus and difference, but “‘Boy’ means young human male” 
188 
 (intending “human male ” for the genus) has two traits for the genus (human + male). Of all 
beings that are both human and male, boys are the young  ones.  
 
Also, when presented in English, a genus and difference definition need not state the genus first. 
English is flexible enoug h not to require that one comes before the other. Note, moreover, that 
sometimes it’s not clear which of two traits is the genus and which is the difference. That’s okay! 
Consider “‘Ice’ means frozen water.” We could intend to get across the idea that of a ll frozen 
things (the genus), ice is water  (as opposed, for example, to frozen hydrogen  or yogurt ); or we 
could intend to get across the idea that of all forms of water, ice is the frozen  form (as opposed, 
for example, to water vapor). Either way, we are c onveying what ‘ice’ means, and were doing so 
accurately and informatively.  
 
Here are  some more examples of definitions attempting use of the analytical method of genus 
and difference (with the intended genus underlined and the intended difference in itali cs): 
 
 * ‘Husband’ means married  man. [The genus and difference could easily be switched here.]  
* ‘Square’ means enclosed geometric figure  with four equal sides and four right angles . 
* ‘Hammer’ means a tool used for pounding . 
* ‘Student’ means a person who studies . 
* ‘Biology’ means the study  of life . 
* ‘Coffee mug’ means a handheld container with a handle  used for holding and drinking coffee . 
* ‘Logic teacher’ refers to an instructor  who wishes to torment students with useless information . 
 
Note that some  analytical definitions may be false, as these are not mere stipulations stating how 
someone arbitrarily wishes to use a word. This is an attempt to explain what the word actually 
means, given current usage in a given context. To define ‘circle’ as a flyin g elephant would be 
false, because circles are enclosed geometric figures, not aerial pachyderms.  
 
**Practice Problems: Types of Definitions  
For each definition below, determine which type it most clearly illustrates. Do not be concerned 
with whether the d efinitions are accurate or not.  
 
1. ‘Calculator’ means a machine that can add and subtract numbers.  
2. ‘Flower’ is something like a rose, lily, daisy, or tulip.  
3. ‘Tool’ means instrument.  
4. ‘U.S. President’ refers to people like George Washington, Abraha m Lincoln, and George W. 
Bush.  
5. ‘Civilized’ comes from the Latin word civis¸ referring to living in community.  
6. ‘Sentence’ means the kind of thing you are presently looking at.  
7. Cooking oil is said to be ‘hot’ if you toss in a few drops of water and the water splatters.  
8. ‘Tiger’ means a cat that is large and striped.  
9. ‘Company’ means something like Microsoft, Starbucks, or Boeing.  
10. ‘Book’ refers to things like novels, collections of short stories, and atlases.  
11. ‘Frigid’ means cold.  
12. ‘Buil ding’ means something like this [as the definer points to a building].  
189 
 13. ‘Igloo’ means house made of ice.  
14. ‘Heavyweight’ refers in boxing to people who step on a scale and the scale indicates over 
200 pounds.  
15. ‘Pen’ means an instrument with ink use d for writing and drawing.  
 
Answers:  
1. Analytic def.    6. Demonstrative def.   11. Synonymous def.  
2. Def. by sub -class   7. Operational def.   12. Demonstrative def.  
3. Synonymous def.   8. Analytical def.   13. Analytical def.  
4. Enumerative def.   9. Enumera tive def.   14. Operational def.  
5. Etymological def.   10. Def. by sub -class   15. Analytical def.  
 
Analyses  
 
Closely related to analytical definitions of words are  analyses of concepts  or kinds of things . We  
might want to know what the word ‘Justice’ means,  or we might want to know what Justice is. 
They are related questions, to be sure, and if we know the answer to one, we may be on the road 
to knowing the answer to the other. The Greek philosopher Plato (428 -347 BC) wrote dialogues 
featuring his real -life teacher Socrates (469 -399 BC) as the main protagonist. Socrates wandered 
about Athens in real life and in Plato’s dialogues asking for accurate, detailed analyses of moral 
virtues like courage, wisdom, and justice. He wanted to understand what these virtue s were —in 
part—so that he could more readily adopt them into his own character. Socrates rarely found 
anyone who could provide a good analysis, and philosophy students around the world today cut 
their teeth on these dialogues to fine -tune their analytic sk ills. 
 
When Socrates appeared to be asking for definitions for words, he was actually looking for a 
cognitive understanding of the necessary and sufficient conditions for something being the kind 
of thing it was. If he had asked about the nature of a trian gle, he’d be searching for something 
like “A triangle is an enclosed geometric figure with three sides.” If he had asked for the 
definition of ‘triangle’ (i.e., the word), he’d likely have been happy with “‘Triangle’ means an 
enclosed geometric figure with  three sides.” The responses are similar, but it’s a somewhat 
different challenge to determine the essential nature of a thing as opposed to what is accurately 
meant by the word used to refer to that thing. Justice is what we want for our society; ‘Justice ’ is 
a word with seven letters.  
 
We’ve just now referred to the essential nature of a thing. That needs a little explanation. A 
thing’s essential nature —in the present context —refers to the character traits or properties that 
thing must have to be the kin d of thing it is. That sounds more complicated than it is. Think of a 
square. What traits must it have to be a square? For one, it must be an enclosed geometric shape. 
Having an enclosed geometric shape is true of some things —like rectangles and circles —but 
false of others —like desires for cheeseburgers, the possibility Bob might fall in love with Mary, 
and Justice. What’s true of a thing can be said to be one of its properties. You can’t be a square 
unless you’re an enclosed geometric shape. Thus having an  enclosed geometric shape is an 
essential property of a square. But you’ve also got to have four equal sides. And have four right 
angles! Each of those traits is necessary for you to be a square. As it is, that list of conjoined 
190 
 character traits —enclosed g eometric figure composed of four equal sides and having four right 
angles —is sufficient for you to be a square. If you have all of those traits (or properties), then 
that’s enough to guarantee your squareness. A complete and accurate analysis of a square —or 
squareness —will thus provide the traits that are necessary and sufficient for squareness.  
 
Objects in our day -to-day, ordinary world will also have accidental character traits. These traits 
are characteristics that the thing has but does not need to be t he kind of thing it is. A table —as a 
table —will have a flat, raised surface; that will be an essential trait of a table. But the table might 
also be colored blue. Blueness is not essential to the table, as we can paint the object completely 
red, and it wil l still be a table. Blueness or redness are thus  accidental trait s of a table.  
 
The concept of a condition  is more general than that of a cause , as all spatio -temporal causes are 
conditions of effects, but not all conditions are spatio -temporal causes. The  presence of gasoline 
is a necessary cause for a standard automobile to run, and we can also say more generally that 
the presence of gasoline is a condition that must obtain for the car to run. However, a fistful of an 
odd number of coins is a necessary co ndition for the fist to hold exactly three coins, but being 
odd in number is not exactly a cause of one’s holding three coins. Also, having a flat surface will 
be a condition that must obtain for an object to be a table, yet it will sound peculiar to refer  to 
having a flat -surface as a cause  of a thing being a table.  
 
In an analysis of a thing or concept, we are looking for conditions that obtain that make the thing 
or concept what it is. We do not want to appeal to accidental conditions, for a thing does n ot 
need those traits to be the kind of thing we’re analyzing. We want to refer to all and only the 
essential character traits, that is, to the necessary and sufficient conditions for an X being an X. 
And this is rarely easy, especially with philosophically  interesting and scientifically complex 
concepts. Heck, it’s even a challenge to analyze what a chair  is. Let’s try.  
 
Attempt #1: A chair is something like that over there [as we point to a chair].  
 
But, for all I know, what you’re pointing to is wooden th ings, or things painted brown, or things 
owned by humans. To what exactly are you intending to draw my attention? I still don’t know 
what a chair is.  
 
Attempt #2: A chair is something like a barber’s chair, a beach chair, a director’s chair, a 
recliner, or  a child’s high chair.  
 
But none of this tells me what a chair is. I continue to be ignorant about the nature of chairs.  
 
Attempt #3: A chair is something that is accurately referred to by the word ‘chair’.  
 
You’re kidding, right?  
 
Attempt #4: A chair is s omething we can sit on.  
 
But that includes pillows and the floor. That may be a necessary condition for a thing being a 
chair, but it’s not sufficient. Your fourth attempt doesn’t help much.  
 
Attempt #5: A chair is a raised seat we can sit on.  
 
But that in cludes stools, which are not chairs. Arg! Try again.  
 
191 
 Attempt #6: A chair is a raised seat that we can sit on, with a back.  
 
But that includes couches, doesn’t it? And couches are distinct from chairs.  
 
Attempt #7: A chair is a raised seat with a back upon  which only one person can sit.  
 
Why couldn’t that describe a bar stool with a back? Should I be going to Wiki for a definition? 
Huh?  
 
Attempt #8: A chair is a seat with a back, where the seat is raised to approximately knee level of 
an average adult so th at he or she can sit on it.  
 
But that excludes two -inch chairs for doll houses, and small though they may be, they’re still 
chairs. Yes? Egad! I thought I was asking a simple question!  
 
Let’s give up and leave this task to chair experts. We’re not saying it’s impossible to analyze the 
nature of a chair, but it’s often more challenging than it looks. No wonder the people Socrates 
conversed with long ago had such trouble analyzing more complex things like Knowledge, 
Justice, Goodness, and Courage.  
 
And yes, there’s vocabulary distinct to analyses! Just like a definition is made up of a 
definiendum and a definiens, so too does an analysis consist of an analysandum  (the concept to 
be analyzed) and an analysans  (the words doing the analysis of the analysandum.  
 
To summarize, we can say that an accurate and complete analysis of a concept or thing will 
provide all and only the essential properties of that thing. In other words, such an analysis will 
provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for something bein g the kind of thing it is. If I am 
analyzing what it is to be a chair, then I will provide all the essential character traits of chairs (as 
chairs), and nothing else. And that’s not always easy; and according to some philosophers, it’s 
sometimes impossible . But let’s go as far as we can with analysis. Let’s not give up simply 
because the going gets rough. Clarity is almost always a good thing.  
 
**Practice Problems: Essential and Accidental Properties  
Are each of the properties below essential or accidental to the kind of thing in question?  
 
1. Three -sidedness is a property of triangles.  
2. Having a four -inch-long hypotenuse is a property of triangles.  
3. A yardstick must have measuring marks.  
4. Water possesses hydrogen.  
5. Senator Sunny Shine gardens clothe s-free whenever she can.  
6. Pastor Bustle is a Central Baptist minister.  
7. Dictionaries contain definitions of words.  
8. Oil -based paint has oil in it.  
9. This pencil is made of yellow -colored wood.  
10. This pencil has the property of being usable for dra wing.  
11. The line making up this circle has the property consisting of points.  
12. This circle has the property of being one foot in diameter.  
13. All dogs have the property of being animals  
192 
 14. No cats are fish.  
15. Some birds are green.  
 
Answers:  
1. Ess ential    6. Accidental    11. Essential  
2. Accidental    7. Essential    12. Accidental  
3. Essential    8. Essential    13. Essential  
4. Essential    9. Accidental    14. Essential  
5. Accidental    10. Essential    15. Accidental  
 
**Thinking Problems: Essential and  Accidental Properties  
1. What are the essential properties of the Supremely Perfect Being (i.e., God)?  
2. What are the essential properties to being a human?  
3. What are the essential properties of a just social system?  
 
Answers:  
1. Traditional theism inc ludes omnipotence, omniscience, omnibenevolence, and eternality. 
Philosophical theology is filled with discussions about this topic. The topic can be of interest 
whether you are a theist or not. Even an atheist might wish to experiment with the hypothetica l 
question, “If God exists, what might be an accidental character of such a being?”  
2. The Aristotelian tradition points to the use of reason; John Stuart Mill —at least in his On 
Liberty —seems to favor free will as an essential feature of humanity; the Co nfucian tradition 
focuses on our social nature and capacity to form key relationships. If you can come up with a 
better answer, publish it, get rich, and pave the way for a truly just political environment.  
3. There is no way this text is even going to try  to answer this one. That’s what Social 
Philosophy and Political Philosophy classes are for.  
 
Mistakes in Definitions and Analyses  
 
The problems we had above trying to give an accurate, full analysis of a chair or definition of 
‘chair’ points to a number o f common mistakes. Let’s look at some in detail. Obviously, any 
definition or analysis needs to be accurate. If we define the word ‘T -shirt’ to mean “a large 
striped cat living in India,” we’d be mistaken, wrong, and muddle -headed. Some people simply 
misun derstand or are ignorant of the meaning of certain words, or cannot successfully and 
accurately describe the essential character traits of a thing. What we are looking for here are 
basic traits any good, useful definition should possess, when they are inte nded to convey 
cognitively the accurate analysis of a thing or the meaning of a word. A good analysis of a kind 
of object and a good analytical definition of a word should not be the following:  
 
Merely extensional  
Too broad  
Too narrow  
Circular  
Negative  
Unclear 
193 
  
Merely Extensional  
 
Since extensional definitions only provide examples, they are unlikely to be a satisfactory 
definiens or analysans. Socrates was constantly running into this problem in Plato’s dialogues. 
He’d want an informative analysis of a mor al virtue, and usually the first thing he’d hear was an 
example of that virtue. In the dialogue Euthyphro , he wanted to know what piety was, but was 
initially told that it’s prosecuting wrongdoers. Even if true, this hardly gave Socrates an 
understanding o f the essential nature of the virtue. Although extensional definitions may provide 
useful illustrations for more informative intensional definitions or analyses, they are our first 
mistake: When offering a definiens or analysans, avoid being merely extensi onal. For example:  
 
* ‘Rock -n-Roll band’ means groups like the Rolling Stones, AC/DC, and Black Sabbath.  
* ‘Rock’ means materials that are igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic.  
* Courage is being willing to obey orders on the battlefield when under heavy f ire. 
* Honesty is saying “No” to one’s boss when she asks you to lie to a customer.  
 
Too Broad  
 
A common mistake in analyses and definitions, and one that is often a challenge to avoid is being 
too broad . Here, the analysans or definiens covers more than i t should; it’s too broad in scope; it 
covers what it’s supposed to, but more. For instance, “A tiger is a large, fierce cat.” As an 
analysis of a tiger, “large, fierce cat” covers all tigers, but also includes lions, cheetahs, and 
leopards. Better would be  “A tiger is a large, fierce, striped cat.” Such an analysis has the 
advantage of not including lions, cheetahs, and leopards.  
 
If a proffered analysis is too broad, then what we can do to relieve our poor benighted friend of 
his befuddlement is to point o ut examples of things that are clearly included in the concept being 
analyzed, but which sadly fall outside his analysans. “A truck is a vehicle,” our confused friend 
might say by way of a brief analysis of his favored means of transportation. In the spiri t of bon 
ami, we might reply, “Your analysis falls just shy of coherent, for cars, motorbikes, and 
hovercrafts are a vehicles, too, yet only the delusional perceive them as trucks.” Other analyses 
that are too broad include the following:  
 
* A ketch is a s ailing vessel.  
* A boy is a young human.  
* A pencil is an instrument used for writing or drawing.  
* A chainsaw is a tool used for cutting wood.  
 
Definitions that are too broad include, analogously, the following:  
 
* ‘Ketch’ means sailing vessel.  
* ‘Boy’ me ans a young human.  
* ‘Pencil’ refers to an instrument used for writing or drawing.  
* ‘Chainsaw’ means a tool used for cutting wood.  
194 
  
Too Narrow  
 
The flip side of being too broad is being too narrow . Here the definiens or analysans covers too 
little; the an alysandum or definiendum refers to things that are not included. For instance, “A 
tiger is a large, fierce, striped cat presently living in India.” The most obvious problem here is 
that there are tigers that presently live outside of India, perhaps in zoos . The analysans here is too 
finely focused; it’s not broad enough; it’s too narrow. Other examples of analyses and definitions 
illustrating this problem include the following:  
 
* An abode is a three -bedroom house with two baths.  
* A birdhouse is a dwelling  for wrens.  
* A musical instrument is something producing sound for a piece played in an orchestra.  
* ‘School’ means an environment in which history is studied formally in classroom settings.  
* ‘Soccer’ refers to a competitive sport played with a ball.  
* ‘Battleship’ means a large, sea -going vessel.  
 
Circular  
 
For obvious reasons, we don’t want to assume people understand the word or concept being 
defined or analyzed when we offer our definition or analysis. If we define a word by using that 
same word —or a near variant of it —we are not helping folks much. Examples of egregiously 
circular  definitions include:  
 
* ‘Musical instrument’ is an instrument used to play music.  
* ‘Loneliness’ is the state of being lonely.  
* ‘Happy’ means not being unhappy.  
* ‘Wood cutter’s ax’ refers to an ax used by a wood cutter . 
  
Sometimes definitions and analyses can be circular in more subtle ways. Imagine a person who 
for whatever reason does not know what money is. You get air -lifted to her isolated village, 
strike up a conversat ion, and use the word ‘money’. She asks, “What do you mean by the word 
‘money’?” As a committed advocate of capitalism, you welcome the chance to afford this 
childlike soul insight into your society’s highest value. “The word ‘money’ means the thing 
made b y a mint.” The problem is that if this otherwise fulfilled woman does not know what 
money is, she can hardly be expected to know what a mint is. You need to know what money is 
in order to make any sense of an institution whose primary function is to make m oney.  
 
The same problem can occur in analyses. When Socrates was hunting around for an analysis of 
piety in Plato’s Euthyphro , one response was “Piety is that which pleases the gods.” Since that 
did not really tell Socrates what piety is, he asked what it was that pleases the gods. It turned out 
to be piety. So, piety is that which is pious. Sigh.  
 
Negative  
 
195 
 A simple problem to recognize in definitions and analyses is being negative instead of 
affirmative. That is, when we can, we want to explain what a wor d means rather than what it 
does not mean. When possible, we want to provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for a 
concept, and not say what they are not. To do the latter in each case fails to explain the meaning 
of the word or the nature of the t hing being analyzed. Note how the following definitions fail to 
explain what each word means:  
 
* ‘Tack hammer’ is a tool that is not used for setting screws.  
* ‘Sloop’ is a boat that is not a ketch.  
* ‘Harmony’ is not a state of discord.  
 
In each case, we could have done better by trying to say what the word does mean:  
 
* ‘Tack hammer’ is a tool used for pounding small nails, brads, or tacks.  
* ‘Sloop’ is a one -masted sailing vessel.  
* ‘Harmony’ is a state of concord.  
 
Some words require a negative definiti on, and in such cases, there’s nothing to be done than to 
define them in negative terms. For example:  
 
* ‘Bald’ means having no hair.  
* ‘Darkness’ means absence of light.  
* ‘Vacuum’ refers to an absence of air.  
 
The same mistake can be found in unsatisfact ory analyses:  
 
* Corporeal substances are those having no thought, will, or consciousness.  
* Being good is to avoid acting in selfish ways.  
 
As with definitions, some concepts require a negative analysis. The concept of darkness, for 
instance, will be anal yzed in terms of absence of light. Still, when we can, we should try to 
analyze a concept in terms of what it is, rather than in what it is not.  
 
Unclear  
 
We place here at the end a hodgepodge list of problems that boil down to making the definition 
or ana lysis unclear. This is more often than not due to poor writing skills, and less often to a lack 
of commitment to presenting a clear explanation of a word or concept to help convey cognitive 
meaning. A definition or analysis may be unclear due to poor gramm ar, or by being vague, 
figurative, emotive, or needlessly complex. We’ll look briefly at each, focusing on definitions, 
but each problem can apply to analyses, too.  
 
It takes careful writing to select words with precision, and poor grammar can get in the w ay. 
Students in a Critical Thinking class should know that arguments contain premises and 
conclusion. But consider this definition: “The word ‘argument’ means where you have a set of 
196 
 statements, one or more of which are premises, and one other of which is the conclusion that 
follows from the premises .” The problem here is with the use of ‘where’. An argument is not a 
place, so “where” makes no sense here. Better would be this: “The word ‘argument’ refers to a 
set of statements, one or more of which are prem ises, and one other of which is the conclusion 
that follows from the premises.”  
 
Here are two more examples of poor grammar getting in the way of a definition being successful:  
 
* A ‘statement’ is when a sentence is true or false. [Statements are not a tim e.] 
* Bill spoke about the word ‘square’. Meaning a four -sided enclosed geometric figure with four 
right angles. [Fragmented sentences convey no meaning.]  
 
Another problem with grammar can reflect a definition’s unwanted ambiguity. An ambiguous 
definiens h as two clear meanings, and thus the intended meaning of the definiendum is unclear. 
For instance,  
 
* In the game of chess, a player is said to be “ mated ” when one player moves pieces so that the 
other player ’s king  is in check but cannot move it legally.  
 
Here, we cannot tell who is mated. Is it the player who can still move his or her queen, or the 
other player who cannot do so?  A better definition that avoids this problem would be, “In the 
game of chess, a player is said to be ‘mated’ when his or her kin g is in check but cannot move it 
legally.”  
 
If a keyword in our definiens is vague , then we’ll fail to convey in an informative fashion what 
the word means that we are trying to define. Recall that a word is vague if even with a general 
understanding of it s meaning, we still don’t know what the word is supposed to mean in the 
present context. For instance:  
 
* ‘Bonsai’ means a small tree planted in a tray. [The word ‘small’  is vague here. Better would be 
“‘Bonsai’ refers to a tree less than six feet in heigh t planted in a tray.”]  
* ‘Desert’ refers to a dry place. [‘Dry’ is vague here; it would be better to refer to maximal 
inches of annual rainfall.]  
 
We also want to avoid merely figurative  language. Here we refer to poetic, whimsical, or 
metaphoric forms of expression. It may make for entertaining writing or discourse, but it rarely 
conveys cognitive meaning. In other words, it can be fun —and even funny —but it does not tell 
us what the word actually means. For instance:  
 
* ‘Puritan’ refers to one who fears th at someone, somewhere is having fun.  
* ‘Love’: a rose with gentle blooms and painful thorns.  
* ‘Chess’ refers to the game of kings.  
 
Since we usually want our definitions to convey cognitively the meaning we intend, we also 
want to avoid using emotive or affective language. Such language may psychologically persuade 
197 
 and stir feelings —and there may be nothing wrong with that —but a roiling of one’s emotions is 
not the  same thing as getting across clear ly what we mean by a word or concept. Note the 
emotionally  charged words used in each definition below. They are intended to sway readers to a 
point of view, rather than to educate them regarding our intended meaning of a phrase.  
 
* ‘Free speech’ refers to the natural right of every citizen to speak his or her mi nd, openly and 
unafraid of tyrannical censure, on matters great and small, for the health of a thriving democracy.  
* ‘Free speech’ is what racists, sexists, and homophobes dishonestly employ to spew their vile 
hatred upon those unjustly marginalized with l ess political power.  
 
Finally, a definition can be unclear because it is needlessly obscure . Again, if the purpose of our 
definition (or analysis) is to explain the meaning of a word (or to provide its necessary and 
sufficient conditions), then sp eaking in  a pointlessly obscure or  overly complex style will get in 
the way of informing our listeners. Of course, some words and concepts are quite complex, and 
demand a complex definition or analysis. The word ‘dynatron’ probably needs something as 
complex as “a vacuum tube in which the secondary emission of electrons from the plate results 
in a decrease in the plate current as the plate voltage increases.” If there is a simple and 
straightforward way of defining a word accurately, however, then w e’ll want to proc eed in that 
fashion . There is no good reason to use fancy, bizarre language when normal, conversational 
wording will do. We should thus eschew obscurantism. Those offering the following definitions 
should be slapped upside the head:  
 
* ‘Dustbuster’ means a  handheld, mechanical, motorize atmospheric pressure gradien t creator for 
removal of particulate matter.  
* ‘Soap’ means a saponified glyceride intended as a sanitizing or emulsifying agent.  
 
**Thinking Problems: Mistakes in Definitions and Analyses  
Read Pl ato’s  delightfully short  Euthyphro or Book I of Republic , and look for various bad 
definitions and analyses of piety and justice respectively. The works can be found online for free 
and in many good print editions.  
 
**Practice Problems: Mistakes in Definit ions and Analyses  
What is the single most obvious problem in each of the following definitions and analyses? (A) 
Too broad, (B) Too narrow, (C) Circular, (D) Merely extensional, (E) Negative, (F) Unclear. 
Some may be guilty of more than one problem, but se lect the most obvious mistake.  
 
1. A trout is a fish.  
2. ‘Happiness’ refers to the state of being happy.  
3. ‘Gourmet chef’ does not refer merely to fry cooks.  
4. A university is something like Harvard, Princeton, or Yale.  
5. A fish is something with gills that swims in the Atlantic Ocean.  
6. A test is when one demonstrates mastery of some knowledge or skill.  
7. Justice is paying one’s debts and telling the truth.  
8. A camel is a ship of the desert.  
9. A guitar is a stringed musical instrument.  
198 
 10. Intellige nce is what intelligent people have.  
11. ‘Telephone’ means a device used for communication.  
12. Birds are things like parrots, eagles, and doves.  
13. Football is a senseless sport watched by cou ch potatoes wishing to escape their sedentary 
lives.  
14. A ske ptic is a non -believer.  
15. ‘Sibling’ means sister.  
16. Socialist health care is bank -breaking, unwarranted give -away to loafers.  
17. ‘Deodorant ’ means a preparation for camouflaging the malodorous secretions of the apocrine 
sudoriferous glands.  
18. Archit ecture is frozen music.  
19. A musician is someone who plays music.  
20. A bonsai is a small tree.  
21. A statue is something like that [as he points to Michelangelo’s David ]. 
22. ‘Democracy’ refers to the self -affirming right of a people to chart their own d estiny to 
greatness.  
23. A ‘sound’ argument is where the premises would guarantee the conclusion and the premises 
are true.  
24. A tiger is a carnivorous animal.  
25. A bird is a feathered animal from South America.  
26. A devout Christian is not agnostic.  
27. Investing money in the stock market is legalized gambling.  
28. ‘Street cleaner’ refers to a public thoroughfare sanitation engineer.  
29. ‘Sandwich’ refers to two pieces of bread holding slices of roast beef and cheddar cheese.  
30. ‘Italian food’ means it ems like spaghetti, lasagna, and tortellini.  
 
Answers:  
1. Too broad      16. Unclear (emotive)  
2. Circular      17. Unclear (needlessly complex)  
3. Negative      18. Unclear (figurative)  
4. Merely extensional     19. Circular  
5. Too narrow      20. Unclear (vag ue) 
6. Unclear ( grammar; a test is  not a time)  21. Merely extensional  
7. Merely extensional     22. Unclear (emotive)  
8. Unclear (f igurative)     23. Unclear ( grammar; an argument is not a place)  
9. Too broad      24. Too broad  
10. Circular      25. Too narrow  
11. Too broad      26. Negative  
12. Merely extensional    27. Unclear (figurative)  
13. Unclear (emotive)     28. Unclear (needlessly complex)  
14. Negative      29. Too narrow  
15. Too narrow     30. Merely extensional  
199 
 Chapter 14: Probability  
 
Probability Theor y 
 
Inductive arguments purport to show that a conclusion is probably  true given the truth of the 
premises. Strength of inductive arguments —as students will recall —comes in degrees. Some 
inductive arguments are strong, some are really strong, and some are r eally really strong. 
Weakness comes in degrees, too. Probability theory attempts to quantify probability, since the 
difference between really strong and really really strong is shy of transparent. Probability theory 
thus attempts to make the degree of prob ability clearer and more precise.  
 
There is more than one way to understand probability, and different probabilistic claims will 
mean somewhat different things depending on what kind of probability is intended. You can 
even at this initial stage likely sen se the difference between the following statements:  
 
* It is probable that a six -sided die rolled honestly will turn up with a number greater than one.  
* The probability of a 17 -year-old male getting in an auto accident within ten years of driving is 
great er than that of a 17 -year-old female.  
* It is probable that Dan and Sue will get married this year.  
 
To determine the probability of these events requires our using different approaches to 
probability. We’ll thus examine three theories of probability: the Classical Theory , the Relative 
Frequency Theory , and the Subjectivist Theory . Each is distinctly suited for specific kinds of 
circumstances, and each can thus help us make sense of the meaning behind “It is probable that 
X.” 
 
First, let’s look at how proba bility is quantified. An absolutely guaranteed event has a probability 
of 1; an event that cannot possibly happen has a probability of 0. Thus probability can be 
expressed in terms of decimal numbers between and including 0.0 and 1.0. A probability of 0.5 
indicates that there is a half chance of the event occurring. A probability of 0.25 indicates a one 
fourth chance. We can also see that probability can be expressed in terms of fractions. An honest 
flip of a coin will result in an even chance of either hea ds or tails, so there is a 1/2 or 0.5 
probability of getting heads. There are six sides to a normal die, so an honest toss will give us a 
1/6 or 0.166 probability of getting, say, a 2.  
 
We can also express probability in terms of a percentage. If there is a 1/4 chance of winning a 
bet, then we stand a 25% chance of winning that bet; if we stand a 0.17 probability of losing a 
bet, then we stand a 17% probability of losing that bet (to covert from a decimal number to a 
percentage, just shift the decimal two p laces to the right).  
 
Finally, we can think of probability in terms of odds. While probability is often thought of as a 
fraction, odds are thought of as a ratio. If we have fifty/fifty chances, that gives us a probability 
of 1/2. That converts to odds of 1 :1. That is, there is one chance of winning (the left number in 
the ratio) to one chance of losing (the right number). A perfectly ridiculous way to convert from 
probability to odds, or from odds to probability, is to chant one easy mantra: “top -left, top -left, 
200 
 top-left….” Notice that fractions (the probability) have top and bottom numbers (i.e., the 
numerator and denominator respectively), while ratios (the odds) have left and right numbers. 
The top number of the fraction and the left number of the ratio w ill be the same. So, let’s say you 
know that the probability of an event happening is 1/3. The odds will be 1:x.  You don’t know 
what x is yet, but don’t sweat it; you’re half way there. Now think of the : as if it’s a plus sign. 
The two odds numbers toget her add up to the bottom number of the fraction. Soooooo… 1+x=3. 
That means the x is 2. BINGO! If the probability of an event is 1/3, then the odds are 1:2. You 
have one chance of winning against two chances of losing, which is exactly what you’d expect 
with a 1/3 probability of winning.  
 
For those who appreciate clarity and precision, the following formula expresses how odds work:  
 
Odds(A) = f:u  
 
In English, this says, “The Odds  of event A happening can be stated in terms of a ratio of 
favorable outcomes ( “winners”) to unfavorable outcomes (“losers”).  
 
The odds -probability shift can work from odds to probability just as easily. Imagine you’ve got 
2:3 odds of winning a game. What would be the probability? Think “top -left, top -left- top-
left….” The left numbe r from the odds is 2, so the top of the fraction is 2. So far you’ve got 2/x. 
The x will be the two odds numbers added together: 2+3=5. So the bottom number of the 
fraction is 5, making the probability 2/5!  
 
2:3 2/5 The top-left numbers are the same.  
2:3 2/5 2+3=5   The two odds numbers add up to the bottom fraction number.  
 
A cleaner, more precise formula might look like this:  
 
Odds(A) = x:y is equivalent to P(A) = x/(x+y)  
 
Here are some examples of equivalent quantified probabilities:  
 
Fraction   Decimal nu mber   Percentage   Odds  
0/6   0.0    0%   0:6 
1/2   0.5    50%   1:1 
1/4   0.25    25%   1:3 
1/3   0.33    33%   1:2 
1/5   0.2    20%   1:4 
1/8   0.125     12.5%    1:7 
3/78   0.038     3.8%    3:75 
17/91    0.187     18.7%    17:74  
1/1   1.0    100%    1:0 
 
**Prac tice Problems: Quantifying Probability  
Provide the requested probability or odds.  
201 
  
1. What is the probability of 4/5 in terms of a decimal number?  
2. What is the probability of 4/5 in terms of a percentage?  
3. What are the odds of an event with a probabili ty of 4/5?  
4. What is the probability of 0.9 in terms of a fraction?  
5. What is the probability of 0.9 in terms of a percentage?  
6. What are the odds of an event with a probability of 0.9?  
7. What is the probability of 75% in terms of a decimal number?  
8. What is the probability of 75% in terms of a fraction?  
9. What are the odds of an event with a probability of 75%?  
10. What is the probability if the odds are 2:7?  
11. What is the probability if the odds are 5:1?  
12. What is the probability if the odds are  23:90?  
13. What is the probability if the odds are 90:23?  
14. What are the odds if the probability is 5/6?  
15. What are the odds if the probability is 94/113?  
16. What are the odds if the probability is 3/19?  
17. What are the odds if the probability is 2/ 8? 
18. What is the probability if the odds are 2:6?  
 
Answers:  
1. 0.8   7. 0.75   13. 90/113  
2. 80%   8. 3/4   14. 5:1  
3. 4:1   9. 3:1   15. 94:19  
4. 9/10   10. 2/9   16. 3:16  
5. 90%   11. 5/6   17. 2:6 = 1:3  
6. 9:1   12. 23/113  18. 2/8 = 1/4  
 
The Classical Theory  
 
The Classical Theory  of probability was developed in the 17th century to analyze the 
probabilities involved in games of chance. Two conditions must obtain for us to use this 
approach to determining how probable an event will be. First, the total number of p ossible 
outcomes must be known. Second, each outcome must have an equal chance. For instance, an 
honest toss of a coin has only two realistically possible outcomes: heads or tails. It is logically 
possible that it could land and remain on its edge, but for  all intents and purposes, that logical  
possibility is not —in this sense —possible. Moreover, if it is an honest toss, then there is just as 
much chance that it will turn up heads as tails.  
 
The same is true of a roll of an honest six -sided die. There are e xactly six possibilities (it won’t 
land and remain on an edge or corner): 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6; and each side has an equal chance of 
appearing. If the die is “loaded” or weighted, it is not an honest toss, and the chances of any one 
number coming up are no t equal to the others. The Classical Theory would then not give an 
accurate analysis of the probability of any one number coming up. Or, if we did not know how 
202 
 many sides the die had (it might be a gamer’s dodecahedron die with 12 sides), we’d not be able 
to calculate any probability of outcomes.  
 
Even though it involves some rudimentary math, the Classical Theory is still inductive. There is 
not absolute certainty, for instance, that there are only two outcomes to a coin flip. It remains 
logically possible  that it might land on its side, or that it will float in the air and never drop. It 
could (if we’re talking logical possibility  here) turn into an elephant and fly to the Moon. These 
bizarre, counter -intuitive scenarios are enough to keep probability calc ulations about ordinary 
events like die or coin tosses inductive operations.  
 
The Classical Theory is easy to use on single, isolated events. We take the number of possible 
“winners,” or favorable outcomes, and make that the “top” number (i.e., the numerat or) in our 
probability fraction. We then take the total number of possible outcomes and make that the 
“bottom” number (i.e., the denominator) of our fraction. And that’s it! That’s the probability of 
the event taking place, or of “winning”! The formula loo ks like this:  
 
P(A) = f/n  
 
In English, that says, “The Probability of event A is the number of favorable outcomes over the 
number of total outcomes.” Below are some illustrations. For the sake of the examples and 
practice problems in this text, unless it’s  stated otherwise, all dice will be six -sided, decks of 
cards will consist of the 52 normal playing cards (minus jokers) in a poker deck, and all events 
will be honest (e.g., no loaded or shaved dice).  
 
What is the probability of rolling a 2 on one roll of  a die? Well, there is only one “winning” or 
favorable outcome (i.e., 2), so 1 is the top number of our fraction: 1/x. Since there are six 
possible outcomes to our toss of the die, we place 6 at the bottom of our fraction to get 1/6. 
That’s it! We’re done.  
 
What is the probability of rolling an even number on one roll of a die? There are three possible 
favorable outcomes (2, 4, and 6). So we place a 3 at the top of our fraction to get 3/x.  Moreover, 
there are six possible outcomes, so we place a 6 at the b ottom of our fraction to get our answer: 
3/6, which reduces to 1/2.  
 
What is the probability of selecting a black jack on one honest blind draw from an ordinary deck 
of 52 playing cards? There are two favorable “winners” (i.e., the jack of spades and the j ack of 
clubs), so we place a 2 at the top of our fraction. There are a total of 52 cards to draw from, so 
we place 52 at the bottom of our fraction to get 2/52 or 1/26.  
 
Imagine that I toss out the face cards (kings, queens, and jacks) from my deck of card s. What is 
the probability that you will draw an ace on one blind draw? There are four favorable outcomes 
(i.e., the four aces), and a total of 40 cards to draw from (there were 12 face cards, leaving 40 
numbered cards). So, the probability of drawing an a ce from this smaller deck is 4/40, which 
reduces to 1/10.  
 
203 
 An opaque urn has three green balls, two black balls, and five yellow balls in it. You reach in on 
a blind draw and select one ball. What is the probability that it is (a) a black ball? (b) a red b all? 
(c) any of the balls? Answers: (a) There are two black balls and a total of ten balls in the urn, so 
the probability of drawing a black ball is 2/10 = 1/5. (b) There is no red ball in the urn among a 
total of ten balls, so the probability of drawing a  red ball is 0/10, which equals 0, which means 
it’s impossible. (c) Here, any ball is a “winner,” so the number of favorable outcomes is ten, and 
the total number of balls is still ten. So, the probability is 10/10, which is 1, which means you are 
absolute ly guaranteed to win (i.e., to draw a ball). Woo hoo!  
 
The Relative Frequency Theory  
 
The Relative Frequency Theory  of probability was developed by insurance actuaries in the 18th 
century as they tried to determine the likelihood of groups of people living  to a given age. The 
Classical Theory could not be used, because the chances of living to age 20, 30, 40, 50, and 
beyond are not equal. The Relative Frequency Theory is simple, though. The way it works is to 
observe a number (the larger the better) of outc omes and see how many of those exhibit the 
particular outcome you are interested in. The handy -dandy formula looks like this:  
 
P(A) = f˳/n˳  
 
In English, this says, “The Probability of event A is the number of favorable observed outcomes 
over the total number of observed outcomes.” Don’t get bogged down in what looks like weird 
math. This is even easier than the Classical Theory. A n example will make this fairly clear.  
 
Let’s imagine you want to know the probability of 17 -year-old males who have just received 
their driver’s license getting into an auto accident during their first year of driving. What you do 
is observe as many 17 -year-old males as you can who just received their driver’s licenses, and 
watch them for one year. The more such males you watch for a year, the stronger and more 
reliable will be your inductive probability calculation. In the course of that year, you note ho w 
many of these males get into an auto accident (i.e., the “favorable” outcome; that is, the one you 
are interested in). If you were able to observe a total of 500 17 -year-old males the first year they 
receive their driver’s licenses, and you observed 25 o f them getting in auto accidents, the 
probability you are looking for is 25/500 or 1/20. We can also present the results in other terms: 
0.05, or 5%, or with odds of 1:19.  
 
Here’s another example. You want to know the likelihood of evening shoppers purchas ing a 
brand of soap now that you —as store manager —have placed it at the end of a store aisle. You 
watch 1000 shoppers walk past during evening hours, and 25 of them pick up and purchase the 
soap. The probability is determined simply by making a fraction, p lacing the favorable observed 
outcomes number at the top (to get 25/x)  and placing the total number of observed outcomes at 
the bottom, to get 25/1000 = 1/40. And again we can present the probability in other terms: 
0.025, or 2.5%, or with odds of 1:39.  
 
The Subjectivist Theory  
 
204 
 The probability of some events occurring cannot be determined by either the Classical Theory or 
the Relative Frequency Theory. For instance, what if we wanted to know the probability of the 
Seattle Seahawks winning their first foot ball game in  the upcoming season? Or the probability of 
Tom marrying Sue this year? The Classical Theory cannot work in either case, because even 
though there seem to be two clear outcomes (win or lose, marry or not), the chances of either 
happening are su rely not equal. Nor can we use the Relative Frequency Theory, because we do 
not have a background of a total number of observed outcomes; we have not seen the Seahawks 
play their first game of this upcoming season before (it’s a unique event), and even if Tom and 
Mary have married in the past, we surely have not observed enough such legal unions between 
them to use this second theory. Again, this potential marriage is probably a unique event that has 
not been observed in the past. What’s a gambler to do who  wishes to bet on the Seahawks game 
or Tom and Sue’s relationship?  
 
The Subjectivist Theory  of probability is the simplest yet, but may seem the least satisfying. 
What we do is go to an expert, someone who knows the Seahawks better than anyone else, or 
who has the closest ties to Tom and Sue; we’ll then ask him (we’ll imagine it’s a guy here) what 
odds he’d honestly, sincerely give that the Seahawks will win or that Tom and Sue will marry. If 
his odds are sincere and based on his knowledge of the situation,  then he should give opposite 
odds that the Seahawks will lose or that Tom and Sue will not marry. We then take those odds, 
conver t them to a probability, and voilà, we have our probability. Simplicity itself! For formula 
fans, here is what the odds -probab ility equivalence looks like:  
 
x:y is equivalent to x/(x+y)  
 
Let’s have another football example. If we want to do the best we can at determining the 
probability of the Broncos beating the Raiders in the upcoming game, we go to a football expert 
who tells us that she’d give 2:1 odds that the Broncos will win (and she’d give 1:2 odds that 
they’d lose). We take those 2:1 odds and translate them into a probability fraction to get 2/3. We 
now have reason to believe that the Broncos have a 2/3 chance of winning that game!  
 
This is called the “Subjectivist Theory” because it is highly subjective to someone’s opinion. No 
one can know for sure if the Broncos will beat the Raiders, nor can anyone know the exact 
probability of it happening. There are too many variable s involved (sick quarterbacks, psychotic 
tight ends, a last -minute jailing of the star running back, a drunken coach…and that’s only some 
bad factors that most people will not know about; good factors can skew probability the other 
way). Still, some people  are more knowledgeable about a team’s chances than are other people, 
and the odds they honestly and sincerely provide count for more than do those of less informed 
people. If the experts truly have expertise in the matter, and if they provide us with odds  they 
sincerely believe in, we may not have much else to go on. That is, our understanding of 
probability in such unique cases may not amount to much more than this.  
 
Now let’s have one more example of using the Subjectivist Theory. What’s the probability of 
Jared getting accepted to Harvard Law School? He’s applied there only this one time, so we have 
no body of observed outcomes with which to use the Relative Frequency Theory. And the 
chances of his being accepted or not are surely not dead equal, so we c an’t use the Classical 
205 
 Theory. The best we can do is to find an expert on the matter. Perhaps that is a school councilor 
who knows Jared and his academic career in high school and college, and who knows something 
about law school admittance demands. If thi s expert offers an honest appraisal of 1:10 odds, then 
we can do the simple translation to a probability fraction to determine that from the subjective 
opinion of the best expert we can find, Jared has a 1/11 chance of getting into Harvard Law 
School.  
 
**Practice Problems: Single -Event  Probability Calculations  
1. What is the probability of rolling an odd number other than three on one roll of a six -sided 
die? What are the odds?  
2. What is the probability of drawing an even numbered card on one blind draw of  a deck of 52 
playing cards?  
3. If we watched 200 Bellevue College students take a Symbolic Logic test, and 25 received an 
A, then on that basis what is the probability of a Bellevue College student receiving an A on a 
Symbolic Logic test? What are the odd s? What is the probability of a Bellevue College student 
not receiving an A on a Symbolic Logic test? What are the odds?  
4. Stan is Bill’s best friend and has known him all Bill’s life. Stan give 3:5 odds that Bill will buy 
a Ford USV within the year. What  probability should we —on this basis —assign to this purchase 
taking place in this time frame?  
5. Ta ke what we know from problem #4 , and include Andy’s odds of 5:1 that Bill will buy a 
Ford SUV within a year. Andy has just met Bill, and is an enthusiastic, optimistic Ford dealer. 
What probability should we now assign to Bill’s buying Ford SUV within a year?  
6. Imagine an urn with four white balls, three black balls, and one green ball. What is the 
probability of selecting a white ball on one blind draw, when  you can draw one and only one ball 
on any given draw? A black ball on one blind draw? A green ball on one blind draw? What are 
the odds for each case? What theory needs to be used here?  
7. What is the probability of drawing a red ball from the urn in prob lem #6 ? What is the 
probability of drawing a ball on one blind draw from the urn? What are the odds in each case?  
8. Janelle gives 10:1 odds that the Cowboys will beat the Broncos in their next game together. 
Given her odds, what is the probability that th e Cowboys will beat the Broncos? What theory 
needs to be used in this problem?  
9. Of 367 Bellevue College students who completed Critical Thinking last year, 192 required 
psychiatric care within six weeks. Based on those observations, what is the probabili ty that a 
Bellevue College Critical Thinking student will require psychiatric care within six weeks of 
completing the course? What are the odds of this happening to such a student? What theory 
needs to be used in this problem?  
10. Imagine an ordinary deck of 52 playing cards. What is the probability of getting a jack or a 
red queen on one blind draw? What are the odds?  
11. Juanita believes that she has a 50% chance of getting an A in her Chemistry class. What 
probability in terms of a fraction, and then in terms of a decimal number, should she give herself 
assuming this estimate? What odds should she give herself assuming this estimate?  
12. The Bellevue Alimentary Robustness Foundation observed 175 people eating lunch at the 
Bellevue College Cafeteria. Of th ose observed, 35 became ill immediately afterwards. BARF has 
good reason to believe that the food caused the illness. Given this finding, what is the probability 
206 
 that a BC Cafeteria diner will get sick due to eating there? What is the probability in terms of a 
percentage? In terms of a decimal number? What are the odds of getting sick from eating there?  
13. Imagine an urn with three green balls, two yellow balls, and ten brown balls. What is the 
probability of selecting a yellow ball on one blind draw? What  would be the odds? What theory 
needs to be used to determine the probability?  
14. Janet believes that the odds are 2:3 that the Eagles will win next week’s football game. Given 
those odds, what is the probability that the Eagles will lose that game? What theory are you using 
here? What odds should Janet give that the Eagles will lose? 
15. Julia’s four friends and eight family members (who all took Critical Reasoning) have 
watched her meet ten football quarterbacks in the past two years, and she has dated s even of 
them within three weeks. Now that Julia has met the Seattle Seahawk’s first -string quarterback, 
and given the information provided here, what probability and odds should her friends and 
family decide for Julia to date this quarterback within three weeks? What theory do they use 
here?  
16. Jessica and her new boyfriend begin to play a rather frisky game of cards, but all of the kings 
and half of the jacks are missing. At one point, Jessica fans the deck of cards out to her friend, 
and asks him to sele ct one blindly. He does so. What is the probability that he will select an ace? 
A jack? A king? Any card at all? What theory are you using here?  
17. Janelle has gone to Death Valley 12 times in different summers, and nine times the daily 
mid-day temperatur e was over 110 F. She is going to Death Valley again this summer. What is 
the probability that the daily mid -day temperature will not reach 110 F? What are the odds? 
What theory are you using to determine the probability?  
18. Jackie places a knight randoml y on an empty chess board. What is the probability that she 
places it on a square on which a pawn usually sits at the beginning of a game of chess? What is 
the probability in terms of a decimal number? In terms of a percentage? What are the odds? 
What theo ry are you using to determine the probability?  
19. Imagine that Jackie is playing white and is about to make her first move. She knows nothing 
about chess theory, so her move is legal but random. What is the probability that her first move 
will be to place  one of her men on c3 (i.e., the square directly in front of her queen’s bishop)? 
What are the odds?  
20. Jillian had three shots of bourbon while playing craps at a Las Vegas casino on Tuesday and 
won money at the game. She had three shots of Scotch while playing roulette at the casino on 
Wednesday and won money at the game. On Thursday she drank three shots of rum and lost 
money to the casino at blackjack. On Friday she drank three shots of gin and won money at 
baccarat. It’s now the following Monday, and she’s about to play poker. Jillian quickly drinks 
three shots of tequila, using what she takes to be critical thinking skills and the Relative 
Frequency Theory to conclude that her probability of winning is greater with three shots of 
alcohol in her. What probability did she derive for winning money at poker while mildly besotted 
this evening? Why is her reasoning and use of the Relative Frequency Theory poor?  
21. A dishonest gambler shaves a die slightly on one particular side so that it’s more rectangle 
than square, making the die more likely to come up on one face rather than another. What theory 
would you use to determine the probability of the die coming up an even number?  
22. Washington Senator Sunny Shine is entering her first re -election campaign. Sh e thinks she’s 
got a pretty good chance of retaining her Senate seat. Pastor Bustle and some of his parishioners 
are vehemently against Shine’s public support of a clothing -optional beach at a remote 
207 
 Washington State Park, so they form the Public Opposed t o Reckless Nudity political action 
committee to oppose Shine’s re -election. Bustle has stated in media interviews that “Shine has 
no chance at all of re -election!” How shall we best determine the probability of Shine getting re -
elected?  
23. You are playing  some form of draw poker and see three aces, four kings, two queens (all face 
up), and ten other unknown cards face down on the table. Your three friends hold five cards 
each, none of which your friends let you see. You need a queen to fill out a straight (K-Q-J-10-9) 
you’re seeking, so you discard one useless card and draw one card from the deck. What is the 
probability of getting your needed queen?  
 
Answers:  
1. 2.6 = 1/3, 1:2  
2. 20/52 = 5/13, 5:8  
3. 25/200 = 1/8, 1:7, 175/200 = 7/8, 7:1  
4. 3/8  
5. It’s st ill 3/8, because Stan is more of an expert on Bill than is Andy.  
6. 1/2, 3/8, 1/8, 1:1, 3:5, 1:7, Classical Theory  
7. 0/8, 1/1, 0:8, 1:0  
8. 10/11, Subjectivist Theory  
9. 192/367, 192:175, Relative Frequency Theory  
10. 3/26, 3:23  
11. 1/2, 0.5, 1:1  
12. 1/5, 20%, 0.2, 1:4  
13. 2/15, 2:13, Classical Theory  
14. 3/5, Subjectivist Theory, 3:2  
15. 7/10, 7:3, Relative Frequency Theory  
16. 2/23, 1/23, 0, 1, Classical Theory  
17. 1/4, 1:3, Relative Frequency Theory  
18. 1/4, 0.25, 25%, 1:3, Classical Theory (there are 16  pawns at the beginning of a game, and a 
chess board has 64 squares of equal size)  
19. 1/32, 1:31 (she can move her queen’s knight or her queen’s bishop pawn there)  
20. 3/4. There are many problems with Jillian’s thinking, but two major concerns are her 
embracing a False Cause fallacy (drinking alcohol does not cause people to win at games of 
chance), and the uncertainty that she has equal knowledge, skill, or experience with each game.  
21. Since we do not know the exact amount shaved off the die, and thus cannot determine the 
likelihood of each face coming up, we cannot use the Classical Theory. We can, however, roll 
the die 100 times and see how many times it comes up even. We’d thus be using the Relative 
Frequency Theory to calculate a fairly strong proba bility. If we rolled the die 1000 times and 
counted the number of times it came up even, we’d have an even stronger argument for the 
probability.  
22. There are two outcomes (re -elected or not re -elected), but the chances are not equal. So we 
can’t use the Classical Theory. Shine has never entered a re -election campaign before, so we 
have no set of observed experiences with some favorable outcomes to draw upon. Thus we 
cannot use the Relative Frequency Theory. We are left with the Subjectivist Theory, but Pa stor 
Bustle and PORN are likely unreliable sources of odds, especially as Bustle speaks emotively 
before the media. Shine’s opinion of her chances may be somewhat biased or overly optimistic, 
208 
 so she may not be a reliable source of odds, either. What we’d n eed to do is find an expert: 
someone who knows Shine well, the mood of Washington voters, and the circumstances 
underlying the re -election. We’d seek odds of Shine winning from this expert, and calculate 
Shine’s probability of winning based on that. That m ay be the best we can do here.  
23. We can use the Classical Theory here, but it’s a bit complicated getting there. There are 14 
cards you know the nature of: three aces, four kings, two queens, and the five in your hand (none 
of which is a queen). The ten unknown cards on the table, the five your friends are each holding 
close to their chests, and the remaining cards in the deck make up the pool from which you hope 
to get a queen (of course you can draw only from the deck). The deck itself thus now contains  13 
cards (52 -14-10-5-5-5=13). There are two queens left somewhere among the unknown cards, so 
you have a probability of 2/13 of getting a queen. This assumes that none of your friends is 
neurotic about keeping or discarding queens, and that you have no go od reason to think any 
friend is holding on to one to better his or her hand. Since queens are generally more valuable 
than most other cards, we might want to say that the Classical Theory can tell us that you have 
no better than 2/13 chance of drawing a q ueen here. Gambling is clearly fraught with peril, and 
students would do best to avoid it at all costs. They will probably be safer watching television. 
Wanna bet on that?  
 
Probability Calculations  
 
Each probability problem we’ve looked at so far concerns the probability of a single result from 
a single event: one number coming up on a roll of a die, one draw from a deck of cards 
producing specified card, male drivers getting into an auto accident, Bob and Sue getting 
married, or the Seattle Seahawks winnin g their next game. Sometimes, however, we want to 
determine the probability of more than one event happening, or the probability of either of two 
events happening. For instance, we may want to know the probability of drawing an ace and then 
a king from a d eck of cards, or we may want to know the chances of getting two sixes on a roll of 
a pair of dice. Or, we may want to know the likelihood of Sue marrying Bob or Tim, or the 
probability of getting a king or a queen on a draw from a deck of cards. These slig htly more 
complex calculations require one or more additional rules. We’ll examine a small handful here to 
help us with some fairly straightforward calculations. A wee bit of grade -school math is needed, 
but no more than to add or multiply some basic fract ions. It’s do -able. Feel free to keep a 
calculator handy for the practice problems, though.  
 
Restricted Conjunction Rule  
 
Let’s imagine that we need heads on two tosses of a coin. We toss the coin once and get heads. 
Good so far! We toss it a second time a nd get heads again. We win! What was the probability of 
getting heads those two times in a row? To determine this, we make use of the Restricted 
Conjunction Rule  (RCR). It’s a “conjunction” rule because it’s a rule about the conjunction of 
two events: we w ant to know the probability of getting the first heads and getting the second 
heads. To use the rule we simply determine the probability of getting heads the first time and 
multiply that by the probability of getting heads the second time: 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/4.  
 
This result should sound correct, as there were four possible outcomes for the two coin tosses:  
209 
  
H-H 
H-T 
T-H 
T-T 
 
There was thus a one -in-four chance of getting two heads; that is, there was a probability of 1/4.  
 
A formula for the RCR looks like this:  
 
P(A and B) = P(A) x P(B)  
 
This says —in fairly normal English —that the probability of events A and B both occurring 
equals the probability of A occurring times the probability of B occurring. We can use the 
Classical, Relative Frequency, or Subjectivist The ories to determine each individual probability 
(depending on which theory is called for), and then simply multiply them.  
 
RCR works only when two or more events are independent  of each other. Events are independent 
of each other when they do not impact or affect each other. Two coin tosses have no effect on the 
outcome of each other, nor do two separate rolls of a single die. Imagine, however, wishing to 
draw two aces from a deck of 52 playing cards when you do not replace the first card in the deck 
prior t o making the second draw. The first draw would have an impact on the probability of 
getting that second ace because the deck now would have only three aces and a total of 51 cards. 
We’ll need a second conjunction rule for this scenario. But first, let’s lo ok at some more 
examples of finding the probability of two events that are independent .  
 
What is the probably of rolling a six -sided die twice and getting a five both times? We roll the 
die the first time with a 1/6 probability of getting a five. Let’s sa y we get that five! We roll the 
die again and get the second five. The probability of getting that five was again 1/6. So, we 
multiply the two probabilities to get our final result: 1/6 x 1/6 = 1/36.  
 
What’s the probability of getting three heads in a row on three tosses of a coin? Each 
independent toss resulting in heads has a probability of 1/2. So we multiply each of the three 
probabilities to get our final result: 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/8.  
 
What is the probability of rolling one six -sided die four times, and getting a two each time? Well, 
the probability of getting a two on any one of those rolls is 1/6, so to find the probability of 
getting four winners in a row we multiple 1/6 four times: 1/6 x 1/6 x 1/6 x 1/6 = 1/1296.  
 
Finally, since urns with balls in  them are so cool, let’s imagine that we have an opaque urn 
holding three red balls, two green balls, and five black balls. We want to know the probability of 
drawing two black balls, when we replace the first ball drawn before reaching in for the second 
ball. The draws are independent  because we replace that first drawn ball before drawing the 
second. If we did not replace the first ball, the first draw would have an impact on the probability 
of the second draw (because there would be four black balls in t he urn instead of the original 
210 
 five, and there would be a total of nine balls in the urn instead of the original ten). So, we reach 
in and draw the first ball. The probability of getting a black ball is 5/10, or 1/2. We replace that 
ball, shake the urn a b it, reach back in and fortuitously draw a second black ball. The probability 
of drawing that ball is also 1/2. To make our final determination of the conjunction of drawing 
the first black ball and the second black ball, we multiply the two probabilities: 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/4.  
 
**Practice Problems: Restricted Conjunction Rule  
Determine the probability of the following set of events using the Restricted Conjunction Rule.  
 
1. What is the probability of getting five heads in a row on five tosses of a coin? What are  the 
odds of this happening?  
2. What is the probability of blindly drawing two black jacks from a deck of 52 playing cards 
when you replace the first card drawn before making the second draw? What are the odds?  
3. Imagine an urn containing one white ball, two yellow balls, and one blue ball. What is the 
probability of drawing a white ball twice on two independent blind selections (i.e., when you 
replace the first ball drawn before drawing the second ball)? What are the odds?  
4. Close friends of Marko and Va leria give the couple 1:2 odds of getting married within the 
month. What is the probability that the couple will get married within the month and you get tails 
on an honest toss of a coin? What are the odds?  
5. What is the probability of rolling two sixes (“boxcars”) with one toss of a pair of six -sided 
dice? What are the odds?  
6. What is the probability of getting a seven and then an even number on two rolls of a six -sided 
die? 
7. What is the probability of getting a number each time on two rolls of a six -sided die?  
8. What is the probability of rolling a three on one roll of a six -sided die and drawing an ace 
from a deck of 52 cards?  
 
Answers:  
1. 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/32; 1:31  
2. 2/52 x 2/52 = 1/676; 1:675  
3. 1/4 x 1/4 = 1/16; 1:15  
4. 1/3 x 1/2 =  1/6; 1:5  
5. 1/6 x 1/6 = 1/36; 1:35  
6. 0/6x 3/6 = 0/6 = 0 (it’s impossible)  
7. 6/6 x 6/6 = 1/1 = 1 (it’s guaranteed)  
8. 1/6 x 4/52 = 1/6 x 1/13 = 1/78  
 
General Conjunction Rule  
 
We need to handle the probability of two events a little differently when the probability of one is 
dependent  on that of the other. For instance, imagine that you need to draw two kings from a 
deck of 52 playing cards. You draw one and place it in your pocket. The probability of getting 
that first king was 4/52, or 1/13. You get rea dy to draw a second time, but now the deck has only 
three kings in it and the deck itself contains only 51 cards. The probability of getting a king now 
is 3/51. The two probabilities together (i.e., conjoined) equals 1/13 x 3/51 = 1/221. If we 
211 
 assumed inco rrectly that the probability each time was the same (i.e., 1/13), then we’d get 1/13 x 
1/13 = 1/169. That’s a different (mistaken) answer altogether.  
 
The General Conjunction Rule  (GCR) is used when we want to know the probability of two or 
more events whe n the earlier event has an impact on later events. A formula for this rule looks 
like this:  
 
P(A and B) = P(A) x P(B given A)  
 
This says that the probability of both A and B occurring equals the probability of A occurring 
times the probability of B occurri ng (given that A already occurred). Let’s look at some 
examples.  
 
Imagine an urn holding two white balls, eight green balls, and two purple balls. What is the 
probability of drawing two green balls when you don’t replace the first ball drawn? Note that the  
second draw is dependent  on the first, because on the second draw there is one less ball in the urn 
than on the first draw. The probability of the first draw is determined using the Classical Theory: 
there are eight possible “winners” and 12 balls total f or a probability of 8/12, or 2/3. For the 
second draw, we again use the Classical Theory, noting that there are now seven possible 
“winners” and only 11 balls total. The probability for this second draw by itself is thus 7/11. To 
determine the probability of getting both green balls, we multiply the two probabilities: 2/3 x 
7/11 = 14/33.  
 
If we had put the first green ball drawn back in the urn before making our second draw, then the 
first draw would have had no impact on the second draw. The second draw wo uld thus be 
independent of the first, and we could use the Restricted Conjunction Rule: 2/3 x 2/3 = 4/9.  
 
GCR is needed when the probability of one event is dependent on another; RCR can be used 
when the outcomes of two (or more) events are independent of  each other. Note, though, that 
GCR may be used in any conjunction calculation (RCR may be easier to use, however, when the 
events are independent). Let’s go back to the urn problem immediately above, and once again 
replace the first green ball drawn befor e making our second draw. We can use GCR here instead 
of RCR. The probability of drawing the first green ball is 2/3. We’ll now replace it. Given the 
first probability, and given that we just replaced the ball, the probability of drawing a second 
green bal l is also 2/3. So we get 2/3 x 2/3 = 4/9. So, students could —if they wished to know the 
minimum needed to get by with calculating the probability of conjoined events —learn only the 
General Conjunction Rule. It’s called a general rule because it may be used  to determine the 
probability of the conjunction of both dependent and independent probabilities.  
 
We need more examples!  
 
What is the probability of drawing two black queens from a normal deck of cards, assuming no 
replacement of the first card drawn? Wel l, the first probability is 2/52, or 1/26. That’s because 
there are two black queens in the deck of 52 cards. For the second draw, there is only one black 
queen left, and only 51 cards in the deck. The probability of that second draw is thus 1/51.  We 
212 
 then multiply the two probabilities to calculate the probability of the two conjoined events: 1/26 
x 1/51 = 2/1326 = 1/663.  
 
Imagine a deck with nothing but face cards (kings, queens, and jacks) of all four suits (clubs, 
hearts, spades, and diamonds). What is the probability of drawing three jacks when you do not 
replace each card drawn? The probability of the first draw is 4/12, or 1/3. We now place the jack 
over to the side, and draw another card. The probability of getting a second jack is 3/11. We set 
that jack aside, and draw a third time. The probability of getting a third jack (given that we’ve 
drawn two previously) is 2/10, or 1/5. We now multiply the three probabilities: 1/3 x 3/11 x 1/5 
= 3/165 = 1/55.  
 
Imagine an urn containing two brown balls, one pi nk ball, and seven orange balls. What is the 
probability of drawing a brown ball (without replacing it afterwards) and then a pink ball? To 
figure this out, we begin by determining the probability of the first draw. There are two 
“winning” brown balls amid st a total of ten balls. The probability of drawing a brown ball at this 
point is thus 2/10, or 1/5. We now set that brown ball aside and reach in for our second draw. We 
now have nine balls in the urn with one pink “winner” possible. The probability of dr awing the 
pink ball at this point is 1/9. We then multiply the two probabilities and get our final result: 1/5 x 
1/9 = 1/45.  
 
**Practice Problems: General Conjunction Rule  
Determine the probability of the following events using the General Conjunction Rule . 
 
1. Imagine an urn with three red balls, two blue balls, and one green ball. What is the probability 
of drawing two red balls on two blind draws, without replacement?  
2. Imagine the same urn as in problem #1 above. What is the probability of drawing thre e red 
balls on three blind draws, without replacement?  
3. Imagine the same urn as in problem #1 above. What is the probability of drawing a green ball 
and then a red ball, without replacement?  
4. Imagine the same urn as in problem #1 above. What is the pro bability of drawing a red and 
then a purple ball on two blind draws, without replacement?  
5. Once again, imagine the same urn as in problem #1 above. What is the probability of drawing 
a ball on each of two blind draws, without replacement?  
6. Imagine an o rdinary deck of 52 playing cards. What is the probability of drawing a black king 
and then a red card on two blind draws, without replacement?  
7. Three logic professors are relaxing at hotel bar after a long day attending a philosophy 
conference on symboli c logic. They drink too much, and stumble their way one after the other 
attempting to go back to their individually assigned rooms. There are only three rooms (each 
presently unlocked) in this hotel, and there is an even chance of each man lurching his way  to 
any one of the rooms. (The female logicians at the conference are whooping it up elsewhere 
having what they’re calling “Ladies’ Night.”) Once each inebriated man gets to a hotel room, he 
locks the door behind him and falls unto his bed in a stupor. The  men leave the bar one by one, 
each stumbling around looking for an open room. What is the probability that each will end up in 
his assigned room?  
 
213 
 Answers:  
1. 3/6 x 2/5 = 2/10 = 1/5  
2. 3/6 x 2/5 x 1/4 = 2/40 = 1/20  
3. 1/6 x 3/5 = 3/30 = 1/10  
4. 3/6 x 0/5 = 0/30 = 0 (there are no purple balls in the urn, so such a sequence of draws is 
impossible)  
5. 6/6 x 5/5 = 30/30 = 1 (it’s guaranteed that you’ll draw some ball of one color or another on 
each draw)  
6. 2/52 x 26/51 = 52/2652 = 13/663  
7. The probability of  the first guy making it to his room is 1/3. Let’s assume he gets there. The 
second guy now has a probability of 1/2, as there is one “winning” room and he has two options 
left (the first guy locked his door and is now passed out on his assigned bed). Give n that all this 
takes place, the third guy has only one room left: his room. So the probability of his getting into 
that one is 1/1, or 1. We multiply all three probabilities together for the final result: 1/3 x 1/2 x 
1/1 = 1/6.  
 
Restricted Disjunction Rul e 
 
If we want to know the probability of two events both taking place (“conjoined” as it were), we’d 
use a conjunction rule. But sometimes we want to know the probability of event A happening or 
event B happening. Here we need a disjunction rule. There are  two such rules we can use, with 
the first being a little easier, but applying to a rather restricted set of circumstances.  
 
The Restricted Disjunction Rule (RDR) is used when we want to know the probability of one or 
another event occurring, and when the events are mutually exclusive . Two events are mutually 
exclusive if and only if they cannot both take place (although it might end up that neither takes 
place). Either occurs, but not both. Examples of mutually exclusive events include rolling one 
die and getting either a two or a three, drawing either a king or queen on one blind draw from a 
deck of cards, and getting heads or tails on a toss of a coin. In each case, you can get one result, 
but not both (and sometimes neither).  
 
Whereas for the probability  of the conjunction of two events we multiply  the probability of each 
event, for disjunction calculation we add the two probabilities. The formula for RDR looks like 
this: 
 
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)  
 
This says that the probability of either A or B occurring is equal to the probability of A occurring 
plus the probability of B occurring. As always, examples will help.  
 
What is the probability of rolling an even number or a three on one honest roll of a six -sided die? 
To determine this, we first figure out the p robability of getting an even number. There are three 
“winners” (i.e., two, four, and six), so the probability is 3/6. The probability of getting a three is 
1/6. So, the probability of getting an even number or a three is 3/6 + 1/6 = 4/6 = 2/3.  
 
214 
 What is th e probability of drawing a red king or a spade on one blind draw from a deck of 52 
playing cards? It doesn’t really matter which probability we determine first, so let’s just start 
with the red king. There are two “winners” (i.e., two red kings: the king o f diamonds and the 
king of hearts), so the probability of drawing one is 2/52. There are 13 spades in the deck, so the 
probability of drawing one of them is 13/52. The probability of drawing one or the other (and we 
can’t get both with one draw, so they ar e mutually exclusive) is 2/52 + 13/52 = 15/52.  
 
Imagine we have an urn with two red balls, one blue ball, four yellow balls, and three green 
balls.  On a blind draw we select one ball. What is the probability that ball will be green or red? 
The probability  of selecting a green ball is 3/10, and the probability of selecting a red ball is 
2/10. So adding those two probabilities together will give us the probability of selecting one or 
the other: 3/10 + 2/10 = 5/10 = 1/2. That should be intuitive, as the red a nd green balls together 
make up half the number of balls in the urn, so we should have a 1/2 chance of getting one or the 
other.  
 
Imagine the same urn as above. What is the probability of selecting on one blind draw a red, 
blue, or yellow ball? Here we hav e three mutually exclusive events, as we can draw only one 
ball. The probability of getting a red ball is 2/10; the probability of getting a blue ball is 1/10; the 
probability of getting a yellow ball is 4/10. Adding them up, we get the probability of gett ing one 
of them: 2/10 + 1/10 + 4/10 = 7/10.  
 
**Practice Problems: Restricted Disjunction Rule  
Determine the probability of the following mutually exclusive events. Use the Restricted 
Disjunction Rule.  
 
1. What is the probability of drawing an ace or an eve n numbered card with one blind draw from 
a normal deck of 52 playing cards?  
2. What is the probability of selecting on one blind draw a face card, a ten or, a red two from a 
deck of 52 playing cards?  
3. What is the probability of rolling an even or odd num ber with a six -sided die?  
4. Imagine an urn containing two red balls, four black balls, and three white balls. What is the 
probability of drawing either a white or black ball on one blind draw?  
5. Imagine an urn with one yellow ball, two blue balls, two gr een balls, three red balls, and two 
purple balls. What is the probability on one blind draw of selecting either a yellow, blue, or green 
ball?  
6. We watched ten prisoners at County Jail eat lunch, and three freely chose to eat cheeseburgers 
(which are serv ed every day). We also watched 20 other County Jail inmates eat lunch, and of 
that group three freely chose to eat tuna sandwiches (which are served every day). Inmates at 
County Jail must  eat lunch, but may choose only one item for lunch. Given this infor mation, 
what is the probability that a County Jail inmate will eat either a cheeseburger or tuna sandwich 
for lunch?  
7. Janet is practicing poker by herself in her hotel room. She takes a deck of 52 playing cards and 
draws four cards: the ace of hearts, th e two of diamonds, the three of clubs, and the four of 
hearts. She’s about to draw one more card, but pauses to determine the probability of drawing 
another ace to get a pair of aces, or any five to get a straight. What is that probability?  
215 
  
Answers:  
1. 4/52 + 20/52 = 24/52 = 6/13  
2. 12/52 + 4/52 + 2/52 = 18/52 = 9/26  
3. 3/6 + 3/6 = 6/6 = 1 (it’s guaranteed)  
4. 3/9 + 4/9 = 7/9  
5. 1/10 + 2/10 + 2/10 = 5/10 = 1/2  
6. Using the Relative Frequency Theory, we determine the probabilities of County Jail inmates 
eating cheeseburgers or tuna sandwiches for lunch: 3/10 and 3/20 respectively. We then use 
RDR to get the probability of inmates eating either item for lunch: 3/10 + 3/20 = 6/20 + 3/20 = 
9/20.  
7. The probability of getting a second ace is 3/48 (since there a re three aces left in the deck that 
now has 48 cards in it). The probability of getting any five is 4/48 (since there are four fives in 
the remaining deck of 48 cards). On one draw Janet can’t get an ace and a five (they are mutually 
exclusive), so she use s RDR to get the probability of drawing either  of the desired cards: 3/48 + 
4/48 = 7/48.  
 
General Disjunction Rule  
 
The Restricted Disjunction Rule works for situations in which two potential events are mutually 
exclusive, like rolling a two or a three wit h one roll of a die. The events are mutually exclusive 
because you can’t get both numbers on one roll. But some pairs of potential events are not 
mutually exclusive; that is, one or the other, or both might occur. For instance, let’s say you are 
about to d raw a card from a full deck of playing cards and will “win” if you get either an ace or a 
spade. You could win with an ace, or a spade that’s not an ace, or the ace of spades. Drawing an 
ace does not exclude you from drawing a spade; you might get both. To  calculate the probability 
of drawing an ace or a spade (or both), we use the General Disjunction Rule  (GDR). GDR 
calculates the probable occurrence of either of two or more independent events whether or not 
they are mutually exclusive. (If you highlight t extbooks, you might want to highlight that last 
sentence.) Since RDR is easier to work with, it’s usually best to simply use it when the two 
events are mutually exclusive. We need to use GDR when the two events are not mutually 
exclusive.  
 
To understand th e idea behind GDR, continue to imagine that you hope to draw an ace or spade 
(as above) from a full deck of cards. Either card will be a winner (and of course so will the ace of 
spades). We might be tempted to add up the two possibilities of getting an ace  or a spade to get a 
final calculation. There are four aces, so the probability of getting an ace is 4/52. There are 13 
spades, so the probability of getting a spade is 13/52. But merely to add these two probabilities 
(getting 17/52) would be a mistake, be cause one of the spades is an ace, and we’d be counting it 
twice. So, we need to account for this “overlap” caused by aces and spades not being exclusive 
of each other, and subtract the ace -of-spades probability (i.e., the probability of drawing an ace 
and a spade on one draw: 13/52 x 4/52 = 1/52) from the sum of the ace and spade probabilities. 
Our calculation will then look like this: 13/52 + 4/52 – 1/52 = 16/52 = 4/13.  
 
This example illustrates the GDR formula:  
216 
  
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) – P(A x B)  
 
This f ormula says that the probability that either of two independent events —mutually exclusive 
or not —equals the probability of one plus the probability of the other minus the probability they 
both occur together.  
 
Let’s look at another simple example. What is the probability of getting at least one tails on two 
tosses of a coin? We “win” if we get tails on the first toss, the second toss, or on both tosses. The 
tosses and their results are independent, as the first toss has no impact on the second. Also, the 
result of tails is not exclusive, as we might get tails on either toss, or on both . Looking at the 
formula, let’s consider the first toss as event A, and the second toss as event B. The probability 
of getting at least one tails will thus be calculated like t his: 1/2 + 1/2 – (1/2 x 1/2) = 1 – 1/4 = 3/4. 
And that result should seem fairly intuitive, as there are three ways to win amid the four possible 
coin-toss scenarios:  
 
H-H  loses  
H-T  wins!  
T-H  wins!  
T-T  wins!  
 
For another example, consider the logician’ s favorite piece of pottery, the urn. This urn contains 
three red balls, three yellow balls, two green balls, and two black balls. What is the probability of 
selecting a red ball on a blind draw when you get two draws and you have to replace the first ball  
drawn before drawing the second time? (These latter conditions keep the events independent.)  
 
We can win here by drawing a red ball on the first try, on the second try, or on both tries. 
Selecting red balls each time is thus not mutually exclusive. The pr obability of a getting a red 
ball on the first draw is 3/10, and since we replace the ball before drawing again, the probability 
of getting a red ball on the second draw is also 3/10. Since these events are independent and not 
mutually exclusive, we use GD R: 3/10 + 3/10 – (3/10 x 3/10) = 6/10 – 6/100 = 60/100 – 6/100 = 
54/100 = 27/50.  
 
The crowd wants one more example! What is the probability of rolling a pair of dice and getting 
at least one one? One die could come up one; the other could come up one, or b oth might come 
up one giving you “snake eyes.” The events are independent, as the roll of one die does not 
impact the result of the other roll. And since the disjunction is inclusive (i.e., not exclusive), 
we’ll use GDR to calculate the probability here. T he probability of getting a one for one toss of 
one die is 1/6. So, GDR tells us to calculate things this way: 1/6 + 1/6 – (1/6 x 1/6) = 2/6 – 1/36 
= 12/36 – 1/36 = 11/36.  
 
GDR works whether the events are mutually exclusive or not, but RDR is easier to us e when the 
events are exclusive. Consider rolling a die once again, this time hoping to get a one or a two. 
Since we’re rolling the die only once, we can’t get both numbers, so the results are exclusive: it 
is impossible for both to occur. The GDR formula can work here, but it’s easier to use RDR. 
217 
 Using GDR, we get the following calculation (keep in mind that getting a one and a two on one 
roll of a die is impossible, and thus has a probability of zero): 1/6 + 1/6 – (one and two) = 2/6 – 0 
= 2/6 = 1/3. Sinc e the events are mutually exclusive, we’d be warranted in using the simpler 
RDR to make the following briefer calculation: 1/6 + 1/6 = 2/6 = 1/3.  
 
**Practice Problems: General Disjunction Rule  
Determine the probability of the following independent events, noting that they are not mutually 
exclusive. Use the General Disjunction Rule.  
 
1. What is the probability of tossing a coin twice and getting at least one heads?  
2. What is the probability of drawing at least one jack on either of two draws from a normal deck 
of 52 playing cards, assuming you replace the first card before drawing the second?  
3. You roll a pair of dice. What is the probability that at least one will turn up with an even 
number?  
4. Imagine an urn with two green balls, three brown balls, and five orange balls. You draw twice, 
replacing the first ball before making the second draw. What is the probability of getting at least 
one green ball?  
5. Given the urn in problem #4 above, what is the probability of drawing at least one brown ball, 
given t wo draws and replacing the first ball before making the second draw?  
6. Assuming that the odds of the Seahawks winning their next football game are 3:2, and that the 
odds of the Sounders winning their next soccer game are 1:2, what is the probability that either 
will happen?  
7. Five women attending a philosophy conference on symbolic logic are spending the later part 
of an evening at a women’s dance club. Three scantily clad guys are dancing on the stage, and 
Sarah, one of the five women, shouts, “I know th ose guys! One is a blithering idiot, but is really 
fun to hang out with; the other two studied logic in college.” She goes on to say that the two 
brighter lads would surely want to talk about symbolic logic with the women after their dance 
routine. She say s the odds are 3:1 that Thomas will want to do so, and 2:1 that Fabio will want 
to. Of the remaining four women, only Barbara is sober enough to calculate the probability that 
either Thomas or Fabio (or both) will want to join them after their dance routin e to talk about 
symbolic logic. What is that probability?  
8. Janet and her four philosopher friends eventually leave the dance club and go to a nearby bar 
to play poker. Janet tries to explain some of the rules to them, and illustrates what she says by 
drawing four cards randomly from a shuffled deck. She deals herself two kings, an ace, a four, 
and a six. She discards the four and six and keeps her two kings and the ace. Taking this as an 
opportunity to show how well logicians can do probability calculatio ns, she asks the four women 
what the probability is of her getting at least one more king upon drawing two cards (without 
replacement). The exhausted but contented women all ably come to the same conclusion. What is 
it? 
 
Answers:  
1. 1/2 + 1/2 – (1/2 x 1/2)  = 1 – 1/4 = 3/4  
2. 4/52 + 4/52 – (4/52 x 4/52) = 1/13 + 1/13 – (1/13 x 1/13) = 26/169 – 1/169 = 25/169  
3. 1/2 + 1/2 – (1/2 x 1/2) = 1 – 1/4 = 3/4  
4. 2/10 + 2/10 – (2/10 x 2/10) = 1/5 + 1/5 – (1/5 x 1/5) = 2/5 – 1/25 = 10/25 – 1/25 = 9/25  
218 
 5. 3/10 + 3/10 – (3/10 x 3/10) = 6/10 – 9/100 = 60/100 – 9/100 = 51/100  
6. We first convert odds to probability: 3:2 is 3/5, and 1:2 is 1/3. Given the Seahawks and the 
Sounders could both win, we use GDR for  our calculation: 3/5 + 1/3 – (3/5 x 1/3) = 9/15 + 5/15 
– 3/15 = 1 1/15.  
7. We begin by using the Subjectivist Theory to determine the probability of Thomas and Fabio 
each joining the ladies in critical dialectic. The odds for Thomas’s future presence are 3:1, so the 
probability of his joining the ladies is 3/4. The odds for Fabio conferring with the philosophers 
on matters pertaining to symbolic logic are 2:1, which makes the analogous probability 2/3. 
Since either or both might wish to chat with the women, we use GDR: 3/4 + 2/3 – (3/4 x 2/3) = 
9/12 + 8/12 – 6/12 = 17/12 – 6/12 = 11/12. The women are delighted at Barbara’s findings and 
expect the evening will progress marvelously.  
8. There are 47 cards left in the deck, and within it there are a total of two “winning” kings. So, 
the probability of getting a “winner” on eit her or both draws (and she could get a winner on both 
draws, making the results independent but not mutually exclusive) is calculated with GDR: 2/47 
+ 2/47 – (2/47 x 2/47) = 188/2209 – 4/2209 = 184/2209.  
 
Negation Rule  
 
The Negation Rule is easy to underst and, and is often useful when the conjunction or disjunction 
rules either won’t work or would be difficult to apply. The idea behind this rule is to figure out 
the probability of an event not occurring, and then subtract that probability from 1 to get the 
probability of the event occurring. Assuming that the event will either occur or not occur, the 
probability of each adds up to 1 (remember that a probability of 1 means an event is guaranteed 
to occur, just like a probability of 0 means that the event is i mpossible). The formula for the 
Negation Rule is  
 
P(A) = 1 – P(not -A) 
 
This says that the probability of an event A is 1 minus the probability that A does not occur.  
 
A fairly simple illustration of the use of the Negation Rule appeals to coin tosses. What  would be 
the probability of getting at least one heads on three tosses of a coin? We could “win” by getting 
heads on the first toss, the second, the third, the first and second, the first and third, the second 
and third, or on all three tosses. Whew! That  would be a somewhat complex set of disjunctions 
to calculate. But, there is only one way to “lose,” and that’s by getting tails three times 
independently in a row (i.e., tails and tails and tails). We can use RCR to determine that easily: 
1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/8. So the probability of “losing” is 1/8. Using the Negation Rule, we can now 
easily determine the probability of “winning”: 1 - 1/8 = 7/8.  
 
For another example, imagine an urn containing two red balls, two blue balls, two green balls, 
and four white ba lls. What is the probability of drawing at least one red, blue, or green ball on 
two tries, when you replace the first ball before drawing the second time? Well, we could use 
GDR as the events are independent and not mutually exclusive (you might draw a “w inning” ball 
either or both times), but it would be a fairly complicated calculation. We can instead easily 
determine the probability of “losing,” that is, of drawing a white ball on each draw (which is the 
219 
 only way we can “lose” here). To calculate gettin g a white ball and then another white ball, we 
use RCR: 4/10 x 4/10 = 2/5 x 2/5 = 4/25. Now we use the Negation Rule to get the probability of 
“winning”: 1 – 4/25 = 25/25 – 4/25 = 21/25.  
 
The Negation Rule also makes it easier to calculate the probability of either of two events 
occurring that are dependent . Consider the same urn described immediately above. What would 
be the probability of drawing at least one red, blue or green ball on two blind draws when you do 
not replace the first ball drawn before se lecting the second ball? Again, the only way to “lose” 
here is to draw a white ball and then another white ball. We can use GCR this time to calculate 
with relative ease this probability of “losing.” Note that after drawing a “losing” white ball on 
the fir st draw that there are only three white balls left among a total of nine balls. GRC gives us 
the following calculation:  4/10 x 3/9 = 2/5 x 1/3 = 2/15. So, we stand a 2/15 chance of “losing.” 
We now use the Negation Rule to determine the probability of “wi nning”: 1 – 2/15 = 15/15 – 
2/15 = 13/15. Cooly cool!  
 
**Practice Problems: Negation Rule  
Using the Negation Rule as part of your calculation, determine the probability of the following 
events.  
 
1. What is the probability of getting at least one tails on fo ur tosses of a coin?  
2. What is the probability of getting at least one two on three rolls of a six -sided die?  
3. Imagine an urn with one black ball, five yellow balls, and two green balls. What is the 
probability of drawing at least one black or yellow ba ll given two draws when you do not replace 
the first ball drawn before making the second draw?  
4. Consider the same urn as in problem #3 above. What is the probability of drawing at least one 
black or yellow ball given two draws when you do replace the fir st ball drawn before making the 
second draw?  
5. (a) What is the probability of drawing at least one king from a deck of 52 playing cards, if you 
are given two chances to do so, and you must replace the first card drawn before drawing the 
second? (b) What i s the probability if you do not replace that first card before drawing the 
second?  
6. Only three racehorses —Bellevue Slew, Administariat, Woman O’ War —are competing at 
Emerald Downs in two races. The odds of winning for each horse in the first race are Bel levue 
Slew 1:2, Administariat 1:5, and Woman O’ War 1:1. For the second race, the odds are, 
respectively, 3:2, 1:4, and 1:4. Given these odds, what is the probability that either Bellevue 
Slew or Administariat will win at least one race? What are the odds of this happening? Assume 
that the first race and its results have no impact on the second race and its results.  
7. Three male and five female philosophy professors wake up with hangovers while attending a 
conference on symbolic logic. Blurry -eyed and achi ng, each stumbles haltingly to the hotel café 
for coffee. Once there, the waitress says that the café has a new pricing option for their $1 cups 
of coffee. Each customer can roll three six -sided dice, and if at least one die shows a six, then the 
coffee is  free; if not, then the customer pays $2 for a cup of coffee. The men all jump at the 
chance, figuring it’s a fun, even bet and, frankly, they’re in too much pain to think about it. 
Among the women, Janet is more cautious and wants to calculate the probabi lity of getting a six 
220 
 with a little more precision than generated by some hung -over guy’s blurred intuition. What is 
the probability of getting at least one six on a roll of three dice? Is this an even bet?  
 
Answers:  
1. P(H and H and H and H) = 1/2 x 1/2 x  1/2 x 1/2 = 1/16; P(at least one T) = 1 – 1/16 = 15/16.  
2. P(not -2 and not -2 and not -2) = 5/6 x 5/6 x 5/6 = 125/216; P(at least one 2) = 1 – 125/216 = 
91/216.  
3. The only way to “lose” is to draw two green balls. We find the probability of that by using 
GCR (since the second draw is not independent): 2/8 x 1/7 = 2/56 = 1/28. We now use the 
Negation Rule to determine the probability of “winning”: 1 – 1/28 = 27/28.  
4. Again, the only way to “lose” is to draw two green balls. We find the probability of that b y 
using RCR (since the second draw is independent): 2/8 x 2/8 = 4/64 = 1/16. We now use the 
Negation Rule to determine the probability of “winning”: 1 – 1/16 = 15/16.  
5. (a) There are 48 cards in the deck that are not kings; the only way to “lose” here is to draw a 
non-king twice. For the first scenario, we replace the first card drawn before making the second 
draw. Since this second draw is independent of the first, we can use RCR to determine the 
probability of drawing a non -king: 48/52 x 48/52 = 12/13 x 12/13 = 144/169. We now use the 
Negation Rule to determine the probability of “losing” (i.e., of getting something other than a 
non-king, i.e., a king): 1 – 144/169 = 25/169. (b) For the second scenario, we do not replace the 
first card drawn before drawin g the second, so here we use GCR to determine the probability of 
“losing” (i.e., drawing two non -kings): 48/52 x 47/51 = 2256/2652 = 188/221. Now we use the 
Negation Rule to calculate the probability of “winning” (i.e., getting a king at least once): 1 – 
188/221 = 33/221.  
6. First we use the Subjectivist Theory, and translate the odds into probabilities. Each horse has 
two races and two probabilities: the probabilities of Bellevue Slew winning are 1/3 and 3/5; 
Administariat’s are 1/6 and 1/5; Woman O’ War’s  are 1/2 and 1/5. The only way we can “lose” 
is for Woman O’ War to win both races. Since the two races are independent, we can use RCR to 
determine the probability of “losing”: 1/2 x 1/5 = 1/10. Now we use the Negation Rule to 
determine the probability of  “winning”: 1 – 1/10 = 9/10. The odds —given this probability —are 
9:1. 
7. The bet is not even, although it may initially seem like it is. Adding up all the possible 
combinations of outcomes for the three rolled dice, it turns out that more than half are 
combinations not containing a six. It would be difficult to calculate all the combinations that do 
contain a six, but it’s much easier to figure out how many do not: each die would need to turn up 
with a number other than six, and each die has a 5/6 probabili ty of doing that. So, for each die to 
come up with a non -six, the probability would be 5/6 x 5/6 x 5/6 = 125/216. This would be the 
probability of “losing.” The probability of “winning” is found via the Negation Rule: 1 – 
125/216 = 91/216, which is less th an a 50% chance. Janet was right to be cautious.  
 
Combining the Rules  
 
We’ve already combined use of more than one rule. We did so repeatedly by using a conjunction 
or disjunction rule to determine the probability of an event not taking place, and then usi ng the 
Negation Rule to determine the probability that it would. Often, we’ll need to use one or more 
rules multiple times to make a final calculation. We might have cause to determine the 
221 
 probability of a conjunction and a second conjunction, a conjunctio n and a disjunction, a 
disjunction or another disjunction, and so on.  We thus might use a combination of RCR, GCR, 
RDR, and GDR. We might even do that to lead up to a use of the Negation Rule. Just think of the 
fun! Let’s look at some examples.  
 
What is t he probability of drawing two aces with replacement from a deck of 52 cards and 
rolling a two with a six -sided die? To determine the probability of independently drawing two 
aces, we use RCR: 4/52 x 4/52 = 1/13 x 1/13 = 1/ 169. To determine the probability  of rolling a 
two, we simply use the Classical Theory: 1/6. To determine the probability of getting both, we 
use RCR (since drawing the aces and rolling the two are independent): 1/169 x 1/6 = 1/1014.  
 
What is the probability of rolling an even number with  a six-sided die and getting at least one red 
card given two draws with replacement of the first card before the second draw? There are three 
“winners” for the die roll, so the probability is 3/6 = 1/2. We will draw at least one red card as 
long as we don’ t draw two black cards. Let’s calculate that using RCR (the first card drawn is 
replaced, so the second result is independent of the first): 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/4. We now use the 
Negation Rule to calculate the probability of getting at least one red card: 1 – 1/4 = 3/4. Finally,  
we use RCR to determine the probability of both events occurring: 1/2 x 3/4 = 3/8.  
 
For the next three examples, consider the following scenario. Philosophy department peers of the 
three men and five women attending a regional symbolic lo gic conference agree on the following 
odds regarding what will happen to their close, conference -attending friends: the odds are 3:2 
that Sarah will win a prize for best paper presented at the conference, 3:1 that Wanda will fall 
hopelessly in love with an  exotic male dancer, 5:1 that Janet will want to play poker with some 
of the dancers, 1:2 that Betty will want to talk about modal logic, 1:3 that Nancy will want to 
quit her job teaching and become a restaurant chef, 7:2 that Mateo will ask Betty to work with 
him to publish an article about logic, 1:4 that Craig will sleep though the second half of the 
conference, and 4:1 that Pedro will try to convince the seven others that he should be the next 
department chair.  
 
(i) What is the probability that either S arah will win a prize for best paper presented at the 
conference or Wanda will fall in love with an exotic male dancer, and both Craig will sleep 
through the second half of the conference and Mateo will ask Betty to work with him to publish 
an article abou t logic?  
 
First, we translate the odds to probabilities. For the events pertaining to Sarah, Wanda, Craig, 
and Mateo respectively, we get 3/5, 3/4, 1/5, and 7/9. Next we calculate the probability of the 
Sarah -or-Wanda events. Both might happen and one does  not depend on the other, so we’ll use 
GDR: 3/5 + 3/4 – (3/5 x 3/4) = 27/20 – 9/20 = 18/20 = 9/10. Next we calculate the probability of 
the Craig -and-Mateo events using RCR (because one event has no impact on the other): 1/5 x 7/9 
= 7/45. Finally, we want the probability of both of these results taking place, and since they are 
independent of each other, we’ll use RCR:  9/10 x 7/45 = 63/450.  
 
(ii) What is the probability of all the guy events occurring, and the Wanda or Betty event ? 
 
222 
 What we have here is a big, lumbering conjunction problem. The italicized and tell us that. Since 
the conjuncts are independent of each other, we’ll make our final calculation using RCR. For all 
the guy events happening we’ll use RCR. Since the Wanda and Betty events are not exc lusive, 
we’ll use GDR to determine the probability of either (or both) taking place. First, of course, we 
convert the accepted odds into probabilities. This is so much fun!  
 
For the guy events, we use RCR to get 7/9 x 1/5 x 4/5 = 28/225. For the Wanda -or-Betty events, 
we use GDR to get 3/4 + 1/3 – (3/4 x 1/3) = 9/12 + 4/12 – 3/12 = 10/12 = 5/6. Using RCR to get 
the probability of the conjunction of these two results, we get 28/225 x 5/6 = 140/1350 = 14/135.  
 
(iii) What is the probability that the Janet and Nancy events will both take place, or that the 
Craig and Pedro events  will both take place?  
 
The Janet and Nancy events are independent, so we can use RCR to determine the probability of 
both occurring. So too with the Craig and Pedro events. Once we get e ach pair sorted out and a 
probability for each conjunction, we’ll use a disjunction rule to determine t he probability of 
either result occurring . Since both results can happen (they are independent and not mutually 
inclusive), we need to use GDR. The whole  process will look like this:  
 
[P(J) x P(N)] + [P(C) x P(P)] – {[P(J) x P(N)] x [P(C) x P(P)]}  
 
Yuk. Let’s work through it, though. Determining the probabilities from the odds for each, we 
plug them in for the Janet, Nancy, Craig, and Pedro events, and get  this: 
 
(5/6 x 1/4) + (1/5 x 4/5) – [(5/6 x 1/4) x (1/5 x 4/5)]  
 
Allowing our pre-college  math skills to kick in, we are looking at…  
 
5/24 + 4/25 – (5/24 x 4/25) = 9/25 – 20/600 = 216/600 – 20/600 = 196/600 = 49/150  
 
**Practice Problems: Combining Probabil ity Rules  
Determine the probabilities called for in each problem below. You will likely need to use a 
combination of rules in each case.  
 
1. What is the probability of getting two heads on two tosses of a coin, and drawing a red jack or 
a black card on one  blind draw from deck of 52 cards?  
2. What is the probability of rolling a number less than three on one roll of a normal six -sided die 
and getting heads on two honest tosses of coin? What are the odds?  
3. What is the probability of getting at least one si x on a roll of two six -sided dice, and drawing a 
queen from a deck of 52 cards?  
4. Imagine two urns. The first urn contains two red balls, one green ball, and two yellow balls. 
The second urn contains three orange balls, two blue balls, and five purple bal ls. When drawing 
one ball from each urn, what is the probability of selecting either a red or green ball from the first 
urn, and either an orange or blue ball from the second urn?  
223 
 5. Consider again the two urns from problem #4. Draw two balls from each urn . What is the 
probability of selecting red and yellow balls ( with replacement of the first ball) from the first urn, 
or orange and purple balls ( without  replacement of the first ball) from the second urn?  
6. Consider once again the two urns in problem # 4.  Draw one ball from the first urn and two 
balls ( with replacement) from the second urn. What is the probability of selecting a green or 
yellow ball from the first urn, and both orange and purple balls from the second urn?  
7. Yet again, consider the two urn s in problem #4. Draw two balls from each of the urns. What is 
the probability of selecting either a red or green ball or both from the first urn ( without 
replacement), or either a blue or purple ball or both from the second urn ( without replacement)?  
 
Answers:  
1. (1/2 x 1/2) x (2/52 + 26/52) = 1/4 x 28/52 = 1/4 x 7/13 = 7/52  
2. 2/6 x 1/2 x 1/2 = 1/12; 1:11  
3. [(1/6 + 1/6) – (1/6 x1/6)] x 4/52 = 11/36 x 1/13 = 11/468  
4. For the draw from the first urn, we use RDR: 2/5 + 1/5 = 3/5. For the draw from the s econd 
urn, we use the RDR: 3/10 + 2/10 = 5/10. To determine the probability of the conjunction of 
these to independent results, we use RCR: 3/5 x 5/10 = 15/50 = 3/10.  
5. For the independent draws from the first urn, we use RCR: 2/5 x 2/5 = 4/25. For the dr aws (the 
second of which is dependent on the first) from the second urn, we use GCR: 3/10 x 5/9 = 15/90 
= 1/6. Next we use GDR to determine the result of the independent and inclusive disjunction of 
these two results: 4/25 + 1/6 – (4/25 x 1/6) = 24/150 + 2 5/150 – 4/150 = 49/150 – 4/150 = 45/150 
= 3/10.  
6. For the draw from the first urn, we use the RDR: 1/5 + 2/5 = 3/5. For the draw from the 
second urn, we use the RCR: 3/10x 5/10 = 15/100 = 3/10. To determine the probability of the 
conjunction of the two in dependent results, we use RCR: 3/5 x 3/10 = 9/50.  
7. For both pairs of urn draws, we face a second draw that is dependent on the first. Since these 
are disjunction calculations, they would be quite complex. So, instead, let’s determine the 
probability of l osing on each draw, and then use the Negation Rule in each case to determine the 
probability of “winning” each draw. We’ll conclude by using GDR to determine the probably of 
“winning” with the first, or second (or both) urns. For the first urn scenario, th e only way to 
“lose” is to draw two yellow balls, so we’ll use GCR (we do not replace the first ball drawn): 2/5 
x 1/4 = 2/20 = 1/10. To determine the probability of “winning” regarding the first urn, we now 
use the Negation Rule: 1 – 1/10 = 9/10. For the second urn scenario, the only way to “lose” is to 
draw two orange balls, so again we’ll use the GCR (because, again, we do not replace the first 
ball drawn before making the second draw): 3/10 x 2/9 = 6/90 = 2/45. Now we use the Negation 
Rule to determine the probability of winning”: 1 - 2/45 = 43/45. To win overall, we need to win 
with either the first urn, or the second urn, or both. Thus we use the GDR with the “winning” 
results of each pair of urn draws in mind: 9/10 + 2/45 – (9/10 x 2/45) = 405/450 + 20 /450 – 
18/450 = 407/450.  
 
**Practice Problems: More Probability Calculations  
Use the Classical Theory, Relative Frequency Theory, Subjectivist Theory, or any combination 
of probability rules to perform the following calculations. Answers can be a fraction or a decimal 
number.  
 
224 
 1. What is the probability of drawing a face card from a deck of 52 playing cards?  
2. We observe 250 men go into a gym, and 12 of them use the rowing machine. What is the 
probability that a man entering the gym will use the rowing mac hine?  
3. What is the probability —given the observations from problem #2, that a man entering the gym 
will not use the rowing machine?  
4. The people most knowledgeable about the Seattle Mariners’ chances of winning this year’s 
World Series give them 1:25 od ds of doing so. On this basis, what is the probability of their 
winning the upcoming World Series?  
5. Consider an urn with two red balls and three green balls. What is the probability of selecting a 
white ball on one blind draw?  
6. What is the probability of getting an ace or a jack from a deck of cards on one blind draw?  
7. What is the probability of getting at least one ace on two draws from a deck of cards when the 
first card is replaced before the second is drawn?  
8. What is the probability of getting t wo kings on two draws from a deck of cards, without 
replacement after the first draw?  
9. What is the probability of getting a face card on a single draw from a deck of cards?  
10. What is the probability of getting an even number or a three on any one of th ree rolls of a 
single die?  
11. The odds are 2:3 that Bill will get an A on his English test. The odds are 2:1 that Sue will get 
an A on her English test. What is the probability that both Bill and Sue will get As on their 
English tests?  
12. Refer to proble m #6. What is the probability that either Bill or Sue (or both) will get an A on 
the test?  
13. What is the probability of getting at least one tails on six tosses of a coin?  
14. In a study of 250 baseball players, five developed severe elbow problems. In a  study of 500 
baseball players, ten developed a bone spur. What is the probability —based on these two 
studies —of a baseball player developing both severe elbow problems and a bone spur?  
15. What is the probability of selecting at least one red ball on two draws from an urn containing 
two red balls, three white balls, and two green balls, when the first ball is replaced before the 
second selection?  
16. Given the urn in problem #10, what is the probability of selecting either a red or a white ball 
(or both) o n either of two draws, when the first ball is not replaced before the second draw?  
17. Imagine two urns. The first urn contains three blue balls, one yellow ball, and two purple 
balls; the second urn contains four blue balls, two green balls, and one purpl e ball. You draw two 
balls from each urn, but must replace the first ball drawn from the first urn before the second 
draw; and you must not replace the first ball drawn from the second urn before the second draw. 
What is the probability of drawing a total of four blue balls?  
18. Imagine the pair of urns in problem #12. What is the probability of drawing either a blue or 
yellow ball from the first urn on one blind draw, or of drawing two green balls in a row from the 
second urn when you replace the first gre en ball drawn before making the second draw into the 
second urn?  
19. Imagine the pair of urns in problem #12. You get one blind draw into each. (a) What is the 
probability of your drawing a pink ball from the first urn or a green ball from the second? (b) 
What would be the probability if that question contained “and” instead of “or”?  
225 
 20. Philosophy professors Wanda and Janet meet with Senator Sunny Shine to urge her to 
support state funding for student loans. They have known Sunny for years, working with he r on 
gardening projects and activist bike rides. They believe the odds are 3:1 that Sunny will agree 
with them. There is also a 1/2 chance that Sunny will invite them to go to the beach with her that 
afternoon. What are the odds that Sunny will support fun ding for student loans and invite Wanda 
and Janet to go to the beach with her?  
 
Answers:  
1. Use the Classical Theory. There are 12 face cards in a deck of 52: 12/52 = 3/13.  
2. Using the Relative Frequency Theory, we get 12/250 = 6/125 or 0.048.  
3. If the p robability of a man using the rowing machine is 6/125, then the probability of his not 
using it will be 1 – 6/125 = 119/125 or 0.952.  
4. 1/26 or 0.38  
5. 0/5 = 0 (since there are no white balls in the urn, it’s impossible to draw one)  
6. 2/13 or 0.15  
7. 25/ 169 or 0.15  
8. 1/221 or 0.0045  
9. 3/13 or 0.23  
10. 26/27 or 0.96  
11. 4/15 or 0.27  
12. 4/5 or 0.8  
13. 63/64 or 0.98  
14. 1/2500 or 0.0004  
15. 24/49 or 0.49  
16. 20/21 or 0.95  
17. 1/14 or 0.071  
18. 102/147 or 0.69  
19. (a) 2/7 or 0.29, (b) 0  
20. Odds of 3:1 con vert to a probability of 3/4. Supporting student loans and inviting people to a 
beach are independent events, so we can use the RCR: 3/4 x 1/2 = 3/8 or 0.375. The odds would 
thus be 3:5 . 