 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 
1 
BUILDING A  
CLEAN ENERGY 
ECONOMY :  
 
A GUIDEBOOK TO THE INFLATION  
REDUCTION ACT’S INVESTMENTS  
IN CLEAN ENERGY AND  
CLIMATE ACTION   
 
 
 
CLEAN ENERGY .GOV  
 
  J
ANUARY  2023 , VERSION 2 

 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
2 A Note from President Biden ’s Senior 
Advisor for Clean Energy Innovation 
and Implementation  
 
When President Biden signed the Inflation Reduction Act into law in August 
2022, he said  the new law “is not just about today, it’s about tomorrow. It’s about 
delivering progress and prosperity to American families.” The Inflation Reduction Act makes a historic commitment to build a new clean energy economy, powered by Am erican innovators, American workers, and American manufacturers, that 
will create good -paying union jobs and cut the pollution that is fueling the climate 
crisis and driving environmental injustice.  
The Inflation Reduction Act will deliver results through a combination of grants, loans, rebates, incentives, and other investments to support the President’s whole-of-government economic plan.  
The Inflation Reduction Act includes some two dozen tax provisions that will 
save families money on their energy bills and accelerate the deployment of clean energy, clean vehicles, clean buildings, and clean manufacturing. These tax provisions reflect the President’s strong belief in building the economy from the bottom up and middle out. Many of the clean energy tax provisions offer bonus credits to projects that are located in low -income communities or energy 
communities, pay prevailing wages and use registered apprentices, or meet certain domestic content requirements—all with the goal of creating good- paying, high-
quality jobs and shared economic growth that will last well beyond the Biden-Harris Administration.  
The Inflation Reduction Act also provides billions of dollars in grant and loan 
programs and other investments for clean energy and climate action. As with the 
tax provisions, Congress and President Biden designed these programs to benefit 
working families  and parts of the United States  that are too often overlooked and 
underserved. The law advances President Biden ’s Justice40 Initiative, which 
commits to delivering 40 percent of the overall benefits of climate, clean energy, infrastructure, and other investments to disadvantaged communities, including Tribes, communities with environmental justice concerns, rural areas, and energy communities.  
The federal government will closely coordinate with our state, local, and Tribal 
government partners to maximize the benefits of the Inflation Reduction Act and leverage the complementary investments of President Biden ’s Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law. State, local, and Tribal governments are in the best position to understand the unique needs of their communities, match those needs with 
 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  3 available f unding streams, and build a strong, sustainable development strategy. It 
is the job of the federal government to help facilitate their work with clear 
communication, transparency, and, where available, targeted technical assistance.    
This guidebook provides a program-by-program overview of the Inflation Reduction Act, including who is eligible to apply for funding and for what purposes. As these programs develop, you can expect more detail to come in the weeks and months ahead. Federal agencies are workin g around the clock to 
design new programs and push out funding as quickly as possible while being good stewards of taxpayer dollars. You can find the most recent information on the Inflation Reduction Act at CleanEnergy.gov
, which we will update as new 
funding announcements and program details become available.  
President Biden sees action on climate change as an opportunity to lower costs for all Americans, create good -paying union jobs for workers, address the cumulative 
impacts of pollution on disadvantaged communities, and ensure America leads the global clean energy economy. We look forward to seizing upon these unprecedented opportunities and building a better America together.  
 
Warm regards,  
 
 
John D. Podesta 
Senior Advisor to the President for Clean Energy Innovation and Implementation The White House

 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 
4 Table of Contents  
A Note from President Biden’s Senior Advisor for Clean Energy Innovation  
and Implementation  ........................................................................................................................ 2 
Executive Summary  ........................................................................................................................ 5 
The Inflation Reduction Act’s Commitment to Equity, Environmental Justice, and Working Families in Clean Energy and Climate Programs  ........................................................................... 7
 
Advancing and Deploying American -Made Clean Energy Technologies  ...................................... 9 
Financing and Expediting Deployment of Clean Energy Technologies  ..................................... 9 
Revitalizing American Manufacturing to Build the Clean Energy Economy ........................... 26 
Investing in America’s Ele ctricity Grid  .................................................................................... 34 
Investing in Affordable and Reliable Clean Energy in Rural America and on Tribal Lands  ... 39 
Incentivizing and Supporting Deployment of Clean Vehicles  .................................................. 46 
Incentivizing and Supporting Development and Use of Cleaner Transportation Fuels  ............ 56 
Expanding America’s Leadership in Industrial Decarbonization and Carbon Management  .... 67 
Investing in Clean Hydrogen..................................................................................................... 74 
Investing in Science and the Department of Energy’s Core Research Mission  ........................ 77 
Protecting Communities from Harmful Air Pollution  .................................................................. 82 
Cutting Air Pollution that Har ms Public Health and the Climate  ............................................. 82 
Improving Pollution Monitoring and Tracking  ......................................................................... 97 
Making Homes and Buildings Cleaner and More Efficient to Save Consumers Money and Cut Pollution  ...................................................................................................................................... 105
 
Lowering Energy Costs for Households  ................................................................................. 105 
Supporting Investment in Energy- Efficient and Low -Carbon Buildings ................................ 113 
Investing in a Sustainable, Lower -Carbon Federal  Government  ................................................ 120 
Harnessing Nature -Based Solutions and Climate -Smart Agriculture to Deliver Economic, 
Climate, and Resilience Benefits  ................................................................................................ 130 
Supporting Climate -Smart Agriculture and Rural Economic Development  ........................... 130 
Preserving and Protecting the Nation’s Lands and Waters for Climate Mitigation and Resilience  ................................................................................................................................ 145
 
Increasing the Resilience of Our Communities in a Changing Climate  ..................................... 166 
Strengthening Communities’ Resilience to Drought, Flooding, and Other Climate Impacts  . 166 
Improving Climate Science and Weather Forecasting  ............................................................ 177 
Making Permitting of Energy Infrastructure More Efficient and Effective  ............................... 182 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
5 Executive Summary  
On August 16, 2022, President Biden signed the Inflation Reduction Act into law, marking the 
most significant action Congress has taken on clean energy and climate change in the nation’ s 
history. With the stroke of his pen, the President redefined American leadership in confronting the existential thre at of the climate crisis and set forth a new era of American innovation and 
ingenuity to lower consumer costs and drive the global clean energy economy forward.  
The Inflation Reduction Act is aimed squarely at building a better America and delivering on 
President Biden ’s vision to make sure the United States—powered by American workers—
remains the global leader in clean energy technology, manufacturing, and innovation. The Inflation Reduction Act’s $370 billion in investments will lower energy costs for fa milies and 
small businesses, accelerate private investment in clean energy solutions in every sector of the economy and every corner of the country, strengthen supply chains for everything from critical minerals to efficient electric appliances, and create  good-paying jobs and new economic 
opportunities for workers.  
In keeping with the Biden- Harris Administration ’s commitment to working families, equity, and 
environmental justice, the Inflation Reduction Act prioritizes creating shared prosperity, making 
the nation more resilient to growing threats to health and well-being, and driving critical economic investments to historically underserved communities, particularly those living with legacy pollution. For several of the clean energy tax incentives, for example, the law offers bonus credits for projects that are located in economically distressed communities or tra ditional 
energy communities and for projects that meet requirements to pay the prevailing wage and hire qualified registered apprentices. The law also will advance the President ’s Justice40 Initiative
, 
which commits to delivering 40 percent of the overall benefits of climate, clean energy, and related federal investments to communities that are marginalized, overburdened by pollution, and underserved by infrastructure and other basic services. Further, through an all-of-government effort, the Administration will work to ensure that investments under the Inflation Reduction Act facilitate  state and local contracting opportunities for underserved small businesses. 
The Inflation Reduction Act builds on the foundational climate and clean energy actions taken by the Biden -Harris Administration and  investments that President Biden secured in his Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law (or Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act), signed in November of 2021. 
Historic in its own right, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law provided billions of dollars to modernize the electricity  grid, build a nationwide network of electric vehicle chargers, strengthen 
the battery supply chain, expand public transit and passenger rail, invest in new clean energy and emissions reduction technologies, improve resilience in physical and natural syste ms, and clean 
up legacy pollution in communities across the country—all while creating new, high-quality jobs, including union jobs, with good benefits and supportive services that build pathways for all to the middle class.  
The Biden -Harris Administratio n is showing that American spirit and enterprise can alter the 
course of history and make people’s lives better in pursuit of ambitious goals. In his first days on 
the job, President Biden set forth a bold climate agenda and has since vigorously advanced 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  6 policy actions to achieve his commitment to reduc e U.S.  greenhouse gas emissions by 50-52 
percent below 2005 levels by 2030. With the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act—in 
combination with the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and other actions—the Departme nt of 
Energy (DOE) estimates  that the United States will achieve a 40 percent reduction in economy-
wide greenhouse gas emissions below 2005 levels by 2030, positioning the United States to realize the President ’s goal  with additional executive branch, state, local, and private sector 
action. DOE estimates that the clean energy provisions of the Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan I nfrastructure Law together could reduce emissions by more than 1,000 million metric 
tons of CO
2e in 2030, equivalent to the combined annual emissions released from every home in 
the United States.  
Overview and Purpose of the Guidebook  
This guidebook provides an overview of the clean energy, climate mitigation and resilience , 
agriculture, and conservation- related  tax incentives and investment programs in President 
Biden ’s Inflation Reduction Act, including who is eligible to apply for funding and for what 
activities . The  Biden -Harris Administration is working quickly to design, develop, and 
implement the se programs; as such, the information in this guidebook is current as of 
publication. In the coming weeks and months, we will publish new developments on 
www.CleanEnergy.gov  to keep stakeholders and potential beneficiaries of these programs up to 
date on the latest deadlines and details.  This guidebook does not cover the Inflation Reduction 
Act’s health care provisions or certain corporate tax reforms.  
The guidebook groups the Inflation Reduction Act ’s tax incentives and investment programs into 
thematic chapters  and explain s how the law will deliver on the President’ s commitments to the 
American people. Each chapter outlines the significance of these programs and includes a one-page summary of each program’s eligible uses, potential beneficiaries, and other important information. Given the cross-cutting nature of energy and climate issues, many of t hese Inflation 
Reduction Act programs and tax provisions could fall under more than one chapter. For ease of presentation, each program or provision is featured only once in the guidebook.  
This document was updated on January 9, 2023 and reflects small corrections to the 
original version posted in December 2022.  
 
Disclaimer  
This guidebook is designed to help users familiarize themselves with the Inflation Reduction Act. Nothing contained in this document constitutes formal guidance from the U.S. government on any law, program, policy, application process, or funding eligibility. Applicants for funding should consult official agency or program specific guidance for additional information. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 
7 The Inflation Reduction Act ’s 
Commitment to Equity, Environmental 
Justice, and Working Families in Clean 
Energy and Climate Programs  
 
The Inflation Reduction Act is a key pillar of President Biden’ s economic and industrial strategy, 
which is centered on investing in America ’s workers and communities to ensure long term, 
sustainable growth and prosperity. To that end, the Inflation Reduction Act is designed to ensure 
that these transformative investments create good -paying union jobs to lift up the middle class 
and bring tangible benefits to communities that are often overlooked and left behind, including communities overburdened by legacy pollution.   
Working Families : The Inflation Reduction Act will not only create millions of jobs —it will 
create good -paying, high -quality jobs that provide a pathway to the middle class  for working 
families , including for workers who have been historically underrepresented in construction and 
manufacturing. Many of the clean energy tax provisions offer  bonus credits to projects that pay 
the prevailing wage  or use registered apprentices . Several provisions offer  bonus credit s for 
projects that meet certain  domestic content requirement s for steel, iron, or other manufactured 
products , creating an incentive to rely on America ’s manufacturing base and American workers . 
In addition, the Inflation Reduction Act ’s historic investments in clean energy will create 
tremendous opportunities for small businesses, including minority-  and women- owned 
businesses, to build wealth and create family -sustaining jobs.   
Environmental Justice : For far too long, many communities across the United States  have 
borne  the brunt of toxic pollution, endur ed underinvestment  in critical infrastructure , and 
suffer ed disproportionate ly from the  impacts of  climate change. The Inflation Reduction Act 
superch arges  President Biden ’s Justice40 Initiative, which commits to delivering  40 percent of 
the overall benefits of climate and clean energy investments to disadvantaged communities , 
including communities with environmental justice concerns . The law provides t argeted 
investments to cut localized pollution from port operations, heavy duty trucks, and transportation infrastructure —pollution sources that have led to higher incidence of asthma and other health 
burdens in low -income  communities and communities of co lor. The law directly supports 
communities working to address local pollution concerns by creating a new $3 billion environmental justice grant program for community- based organizations and their partners.  
Tribes: Native communities have long suffered from underinvestment , contributing to poor 
health and economic outcomes in Indian Country. The Inflation Reduction Act supplements 
historic investments in the American Rescue Plan and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law in Tribal communities. The Inflation Reductio n Act provides $75 million to help guarantee up to $20 
billion in loans to support T ribal investment in energy- related projects  and $150 million to 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 8 electrify  Tribal homes with clean energy. It also appropriates $225 million for T ribal climate 
resilience, w hich can include support for community driven relocation for  Tribes threatened by 
the impacts of climate change. Tribes are eligible for most of the clean energy tax incentives in 
the law and many of the other funding programs , as described in this guidebook, and will benefit 
from the President ’s Justice40 Initiative.  
Energy Communities:  The Inflation Reduction Act provides targeted support for energy 
communities, which include areas in which a coal mine or coal -fired power plant has closed or 
that have been economically reliant on the extraction, processing, transport, or storage of coal , 
oil, or natural gas  but now face higher -than-average unemployment. These are communities that 
have underpinned America ’s economic growth and powered this country for decades. To help 
ensure these communities are dealt into the clean energy economy, the I nflation Reduction Act ’s 
production and investment tax credits for clean electricity offer bonus credits for projects located in an energy community. The law  also creates a new Energy Infrastructure Reinvestment 
Financing Program  at the Department of Energ y, which will guarantee loans to projects that 
retool, repower, repurpose, or replace energy infrastructure that has ceased operations —such as a 
coal-fired power plant —or that enable operating energy infrastructure to reduce their greenhouse 
gas emissions.   
Rural America:  Rural America will benefit from the Inflation Reduction Act’ s investments in 
energy communities, communities with environmental justice concerns, Tribes, and working families, as described above. But the Inflation Reduction Act also makes targeted, tailored investments  in R ural America to improve electric ity service in rural areas , expand access to 
affordable clean energy, advance  climate -smart agriculture and forestry practices, and support 
agriculture -based biofuels. The law recognizes th at farmers and ranchers are an essential part of 
the climate solution and supports conservation projects that directly enhance  soil carbon or 
reduce, capture, avoid, or sequester greenhouse gases from agricultural production. The Inflation Reduction Act also offers financial support to farmers and ranchers, including those affected by the COVID -19 pandemic and climate -fueled natural disasters, such as the extreme drought 
plaguing much of the western United States. 
Throughout this guidebook, we highlight the tax provisions, grant programs, and other funding 
programs that will offer transformative benefits to working families; disadvantaged, underserved, and low -income communities; Tribes; rural areas; and other areas  in need of economic 
development and growth.    
 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
9 Advancing and Deploying American-
Made Clean Energy Technologies  
 
The Inflation Reduction Act  is the most ambitious investment in clean energy in our nation’ s 
history. It includes more than 20 new or modified tax incentives and tens of billions of dollars in 
grant and loan programs to unleash new clean energy technology investment and deployment and supercharge our transition to a clean energy economy. These investments are designed to unlock truly transformative change that not only builds a low-carbon energy system with American -made technology, but also delivers lower energy costs and good-paying jobs, 
particularly in communities that are underserved, low-income, or overburdened by pollution.  
Financing and Expediting Deployment of Clean 
Energy Technologies  
Tackling the climate crisis  requires a rapid and deep transition in America’s energy system to 
cleaner sources, starting with the electric power sector. President Biden  has set ambitious goa ls 
of reaching 100 percent carbon pollution-free electricity by 2035; a 50 -52 percent reduction from 
2005 levels in economy-wide net greenhouse gas pollution in 2030; and net zero emissions economy-wide by no later than 2050. To meet P resident Biden’ s ambitious climate goals, the 
United States needs to accelerate deployment of commercially -available clean energy 
technologies and invest in new technologies that have game-changing potential. The Inflation Reduction Act includes billions of dollars in grants and loans to spur financing and deployment of new clean energy projects that cut greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants, with a focus on projects in disadvantaged communities , energy communities, and other communities in need.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act includes several tax provisions and significant grant and loan programs to support deployment of commercially-available and innovative clean energy technologies. Highlights include:   
• Clean Energy Production and Investment Tax Credits . The Production Tax Credit 
(PTC) and Investment Tax Credit (ITC) for renewable energy have helped drive deployment of wind farms and solar arrays in the United States, resulting in clean energy providing a majority of  all electricity capacity additions in recent years. The Inflation 
Reduction Act modifies and extends the current PTC and ITC through 2023 and 2024, at which point they sunset in favor of technology-neutral, emissions- based credits, the 
Clean Electricity PTC and Clean El ectricity ITC. For both the extended and future tax 
credits, the Inflation Reduction Act structures them to incentivize investment in disadvantaged communities and ensure newly-created jobs are good-paying jobs. A project  or facility can earn  bonus credits if it meets Davis -Bacon prevailing wage and 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  10 registered apprenticeship requirements, meets certain  domestic content requirements, 
and/or is located in an energy community. As described in the text box on the following 
page, the ITC offers additional bonuses for wind and solar projects in low- income 
communities.  
• $27 billion for the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. The Inflation Reduction Act provides
 the En vironmental Protection Agency with $27 billion to award  competitive 
grants to mobilize financing and leverage private capital for clean energy and climate projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, with an emphasis on projects that benefit low-income and disadvantaged communities. This significant new program will meet the 
requirements of the President ’s Justice40 Initiative, which commits to delivering 40 
percent of the benefits of certain federal investments to disadvantaged communities. 
• $40 billion in loan authority to guarantee loans for innovative clean energy projects. The Inflation Reduction Act provides
 the Department of Energy Loan Programs Office 
with $40 billion in loan au thority supported by $3.6 billion in credit subsidy for loan 
guarantees under section 1703 of the Energy Policy Act for innovative clean energy technologies, including renewable energy systems, carbon capture, nuclear energy, and critical minerals processing, manufacturing, and recycling.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13101  45 Production Tax Credit for Electricity from 
Renewables  - 
Department of the Treasury  13102  48 Investment Tax Credit for Energy Property  - 
Department of the Treasury  13103  48(e) , 
48E(h)  Increase in Energy Credit for Solar and 
Wind Facilities Placed in Service in 
Connection with Low -Income Communities  - 
Department of the Treasury  13105  45U Zero -Emission Nuclear Power Production 
Credit  - 
Department of the Treasury  13701  45Y Clean Electricity Production Tax Credit - 
Department of the Treasury  13702(h)  48E Clean Electricity Investment Tax Credit  - 
Department of the Treasury  13703*  168(e)(3)
(B) Cost Recovery for Qualified Facilities, 
Qualified Property, and Energy Storage Technology  - 
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60103  - Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund  $27,000,000,000  
Department of Energy  50141  - Funding for Department of Energy Loan 
Programs Office  $3,600,000,000  
Department of Energy  50145  - Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program  $75,000,000  
*A description of this section appears in the summaries for sections 13701 and 13702.  
 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 11 Each of the tax credits in the above  table , except for 168(e)(3)(B), is eligible for direct pay 
and transferability. S ection 13801 of the Inflation Reduction Act, which adds Section 6417 of 
the Internal Revenue Cod e, extend s many of the law ’s tax incentives to entities that generally do 
not benefit from income tax credits, such as state, local, and T ribal governments  and other tax -
exempt entities. Specifically, these  entities can elect to receive some of the Inflation Reduction 
Act’s tax credits in the form of direct payments. S ection 13801 also adds Section 6418 of the 
Internal Revenue Code and makes certain tax credits transferable. In these cases, t axpayers that 
are generally ineligible for direct payment of credi ts may transfer all or a portion of certain 
credits to an unrelated party in exchange for cash.  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  12  
Delivering on the President ’s Commitment to Working Families, Equity, and 
Environmental Justice in the Clean Energy Economy  
 
For too long, Tribal nations, rural areas, low- income communities, and communities of color 
have been left behind as the rest of America prospers. Th rough the Inflation Reduction Act , we 
will invest billions  of dollars to expedite and expand deployment of new clean energy proj ects so 
that these communities will benefit in the form of new economic development, good-paying 
jobs, and less pollution.  
 
The Inflation Reduction Act structures the clean energy Production Tax Credit (PTC) and 
Investment Tax Credit (ITC) provisions to incentivize investment in communities most in need 
of new economic development. The PTC, as extended, and the new Clean Electr icity PTC offer a 
10 percent  credit increase for facilities located in an energy community. The ITC, as extended, 
and the new Clean Electricity ITC offer up to a 10 -percentage point bonus credit  for projects 
located in an energy community. The ITCs also of fer another 10-percentage point bonus 
allocated investment credit for qualified solar and wind facilities located in a low -income 
community or on Tribal  land and a 20-percentage point bonus for projects that are part of a 
qualified low-income residential building project or a qualified low- income economic benefit 
project.  This bonus amount will require an application by the taxpayer, with a cumulative tot al of 
1.8 GW of direct current capacity per year available for allocation.  Additional information about 
this allocated bonus credit will be issued by the Department of the Treasury.  
 
The Inflation Reduction Act also structures the tax provisions to ensure that new clean energy 
projects create good -paying jobs. The PTC and ITC offer bonus credit to projects that pay the 
prevailing wage or use registered apprentices. They also offer bonus credit for projects that meet 
certain domestic content requirements for  steel, iron, and  manufactured  products, a provision 
designed to strengthen America’s manufacturing base and the good-paying jobs needed to 
support it. The Zero -Emission Nuclear Power Production Credit also offers bonus credit for 
facilities meeting prevailing wage requirements. 
 
The Environmental Protection Agency’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, by statute, must 
dedicate at least $15 billion of the Fund’s $27 billion appropriation to help low-income and 
disadvantaged communities deploy or benefit from projects that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and other air pollution. This requirement aligns with the President’s Justice40 
Initiative, which commits to delivering 40 percent of the benefits of certain federal investments 
to disadvantaged communities.  
 
As noted above, the ITC offers bonus credit for solar and wind investments on Tribal land. In 
addition, t he Inflation Reduction Act increases  the Department of Energy’s loan authority from 
$2 billion to $20 billion for the Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program, allowing the agency to 
offer more support to Tribal Energy Development Organizations and federally recognized 
Tribes, including Alaska Native villages or regional or village corporations, for energy- related 
projects .  
 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  13 Production Tax Credit for Electricity from Renewables  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13101 Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45 
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for production of electricity from renewable 
sources.  
Period of Availability:  Projects beginning construction before 1/1/25. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. Extended for projects beginning construction before 1/1/25. Modified to tie the value of the credit to meeting prevailing wage and registered apprenticeship requirements. 
Eligible Recipients: Facilities generating electricity from wind, biomass, geothermal, solar, small irrigation, landfill and trash, hydropower, and marine and hydrokinetic renewable energy.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 0.3 cents/kW, inflation adjusted
*  
Bonus Credit Amount:  Credit is increased by 5 times for projects meeting prevailing wage and 
registered apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here . 
Credit is increased by 10% if the project meets certain domestic content requirements for steel, iron, and manufactured products. Credit is  increased by 10% if located in an energy community. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural electricity co -ops. Applies to qualified facilities that are originally placed in service after 
December 31, 2022; applies separatel y with respect to each qualified facility.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 45(b)(3). 
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives
 
(10/5/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
 
* A previous version of this guidebook erroneously stated the base credit as $0.03/kW.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  14 Investment Tax Credit for Energy Property  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13102 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 48 Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for investment in renewable energy projects. 
Period of Availability:  Projects  beginning construction before 1/1/25. For geothermal heat 
property, the base investment tax credit is 6% for the first 10 years, scaling down to 5.2% in 
2033 and 4.4% in 2034. 
Tax Mechanism:  Investment tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended to include standalone energy storage with 
capacity of at  least 5 kWh, biogas, microgrid controllers (20MW or less), and interconnection 
property for small projects (5MW or less) . Value of the credit tied to prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requi rements.  
Eligible Recipients: Fuel cell, solar, geothermal, small wind, energy storage, biogas, microgrid controllers, and combined heat and power properties . For solar, includes (1) equipment that  uses 
solar energy to generate electricity, to heat or cool (or provide hot water for use in) a structure, or to provide solar process heat, and (2) equipment that  uses solar energy to illuminate the inside of 
a structure using fiber-optic distributed sunl ight or electrochromic glass that uses electricity to 
change its light transmittance properties in order to heat or cool a structure.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 6% of qualified investment (basis of energy property) 
Bonus Credit Amount:  Credit is increased by 5 times for projects  meeting prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here
. 
Credit is increased by up to 10 percentage points  for projects  meeting  certain  domestic content 
requirements for steel, iron, and manufactured products. Credit is in creased by up to 10 
percentage points if located in an energy community. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural 
electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 45(b)(3). 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  15 Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives  
(10/5/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  16 Increase in Energy Credit for Solar and Wi nd Facilities Placed in Service in 
Connection with Low-Income Communities 
 
 
Federal Agency:  Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13103, 13702(h) 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 48(e) , 26 U.S. Code § 48E (h) 
Tax Provision Description: Provides an additional investment tax credit for small- scale solar 
and wind facilities in low -income communities.  
Period of Availability:  48(e) begins in 2023 and ends when the 48E(h) Clean Electricity 
Investment Tax Credit becomes available in 2025 through 2032. Tax Mechanism:  Allocated investment credit, capped at 1.8 GW per year. Unused capacity 
carries over to following year. New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Solar and wind facilities with a maximum net outpu t of less than 5 MW, 
including associated energy storage technology.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes, facilities on Indian land qualify for the 10 percentage point bonus credit. 
Base Credit Amount: 6% of qualified investment (basis of energy property) Bonus Credit  Amount:  Credit is increased by  10 percentage points for facilities located in low -
income communities or on Tribal  land. Credit is increased by 20 percentage points for facilities 
that are part of certain federally subsidized housing programs or that offer at least 50  percent  of 
the financial benefits  of the electricity produced  to low -income households. This bonus amount 
will require an application by the taxpayer, with a cumulative total of 1.8 GW of direct current 
capacity per year available for all ocation. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority ; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural 
electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability : No rules  
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives
 
(10/5/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  17 Zero -Emission Nuclear Power Production Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13105 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45U  
Tax Provision Description: Tax credit for electricity produced at a qualified nuclear power 
facility.  
Period of Availability:  Available for electricity produced and sold after 12/31/23, in tax years 
beginning after that date. Not available for tax years beginning after 12/31/32. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Existing nuclear power plants at time of enactment that are not eligible for 
the 45J credit.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 0.3 cents/kWh, inflation adjusted after 2024. Credit amount phases down depending on the amount of energy produced and the gross receipts of the nuclear power facility.  
Bonus Cred it Amount: 5 times the base credit if prevailing wage requirement is met for 
workers doing alteration or repair at the facility. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is 
available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Facilities eligible for the 45J advanced nuclear production tax credit are not eligible for the 45U credit. Payments from federal, state, or local zero -emiss ion nuclear subsidies 
reduce the credit amount . 
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives
 
(10/5/2022)    
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  18 Clean Electricity Production Tax Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13701 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45Y  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a technology-neutral tax credit for production of clean 
electricity. Replaces the production tax credit for electricity generated from renewable sources (extended in Section 13201 through 2024). 
Period of Availability:  Facilities placed in service after 12/31/24. Phase- out starts the later of 
(a) 2032 or (b) when U.S. greenhouse gas emissions from electricity are 25% of 2022 emissions 
or lower.  
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Facilities generating electricity for which the greenhouse gas emissions rate is not greater than zero.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 0.3 cents/kW, inflation adjusted
† 
Bonus Credit Amount:  Credit is increased by 5 times for projects meeting prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here . 
Credit is increased by 10% for projects meeting certain domestic content requirements for steel, iron, and manufactured products. Credit is increased by 10% if located in an energy community. 
Direct Pay Eligi bility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural electricity co -ops. Applies separately with regard to each facility. 
Transferability : Yes  
Stackability: Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 45(b)(3). 
Additional Information:  Section 13703 offers an additional tax deduction for facilities or 
property qualifying for this tax credit. These facilities  or property will be treated as a 5 -year 
 
† A previous version of this guidebook erroneously stated the base credit as $0.03/kW. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  19 property for purposes of cost recovery; meaning, they  will be able to deduct from their taxable 
income the depreciating value of their business assets, such as equipment, faster than the value 
actually declines. In practical t erms, qualifying facilities  or property will be able to take bigger 
deductions—leaving them with lower taxable income —in the earlier years of a clean energy 
investment.  
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives  
(10/5/2022)  
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  20 Clea n Electricity Investment Tax Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13702 
Tax Code Location:  26 U.S. Code § 48E 
Tax Provision Description: Provides a technology- neutral tax credit for investment in facilities 
that generate clean electricity. Replaces the investment tax credit for facilities generating 
electricity from renewable sources (extended in Section 13202 through 2024). 
Period of Availability:  Facilities placed in service after 12/31/24. Phase- out starts the later of 
(a) 2032 or (b) when U.S. greenhouse gas emissions from electricity are 25% of 2022 emissions 
or lower.  
Tax Mechanism:  Investment tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Facilities that generate electricity w ith a greenhouse gas emissions rate that 
is not greater than zero and qualified energy storage technologies.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 6% of qualified investment (basis) 
Bonus Credit Amount:  Credit is increased by 5 times for facilities meeting prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here . 
Credit is increased by  up to 10 percentage points  for facilities meeting  certain  domestic content 
requirements for steel, iron, and manufactured products. Credi t is increased by up to 10 
percentage points if located in an energy community. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural 
electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 45(b)(3). 
Additional Information:  Section 13703 offers an additional tax deduction for facilities or 
property qualifying for this tax credit. These facilities  or property will be treated as a 5 -year 
property for purposes of cost recovery; meaning, they  will be able to deduct from their taxable 
income the depreciating value of their business assets, such as equipment, faster than the value 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  21 actually declines. In practical terms, qualifying facilities  or property will be able to ta ke bigger 
deductions—leaving them with lower taxable income —in the earlier years of a clean energy 
investment.  
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Certain Energy Generation Incentives  
(10/5/2022)  
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  22 Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund  
 
 
Federal Agency:  Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office:  Office of the Administrator  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60103 
Program Description: To provide competitive grants to mobilize financing and leverage private 
capital for clean energy and climate projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, with an emphasis on projects that benefit low-income and disadvantaged communities. This includes (1) $7 billion to provide financial and technical assistance to low-income and disadvantaged communities to deploy or benefit from zero-emission technologies, including distribut ed 
technologies on residential rooftops, and to carry out other greenhouse gas emission reduction activities; and (2) $19.97 billion to provide financial and technical assistance for qualified projects that reduce or avoid greenhouse gas emissions and other forms of air pollution, with $8 billion specifically carved  out for low-income and disadvantaged communities. 
Funding Amount:  $27,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available to EPA until September 30, 2024. Must begin 
implementing the grant program by February 15, 2023 (180 days after enactment). 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: (1) States, municipalities, Tribal governments, and “ eligible recipients ” are 
eligible for the $7 billion  for low -income and disadvantaged communities. (2) ‘ Eligible 
recipients, ’ as defined in the statute, are eligible for the $19.97 billion, of which $8 billion is 
reserved for projects that provide financial and technical assistance in low -income and 
disadvantaged communities. The term ‘ eligible recipient’ means a nonprofit organization that— 
(A) is designed to provide capital, including by leveraging private capital, and other forms of 
financial assistance for the rapid deployment of low- and zero -emission p roducts, technologies, 
and services; (B) does not take deposits other than deposits from repayments and other revenue received from financial assistance provided using grant funds under this section; (C) is funded by public or charitable contributions; and (D) invests in or finances projects alone or in conjunction with other investors. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Tribal governments are eligible to be direct recipients for the $7 billion for 
low-income and disadvantaged communities. Eligible Uses:  Grant recipients will provide financial and technical assistance for zero -emission 
technology and qualified projects. The term ‘ zero-emission technology’ means any technology 
that produces zero emissions of any air pollutant that is listed pursuant to section 108(a) of the  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  23 Clean Air Act  (or any precursor to such an air pollutant); and any greenhouse gas.’ The term 
‘qualified project’ includes any project, activity, or technology that— (A) reduces or avoids 
greenhouse gas emissions and other forms of air pollution in partnership with, and by leveraging investment from, the private sector; or (B) assists communities in the efforts of those communities to reduce or avoid greenhouse gas emissions and other forms of air pollution. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
Relevant Announcements:  EPA Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund Announcements  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  24 Funding for Department of Energy Loan Programs Office  
 
 
Federal Agency:  Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office:  Loan Programs Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50141 
Program Description: To support the cost of loans for innovative clean energy technologies. 
IRA provides $40 billion of loan authority supported by $3.6 billion in credit subsidy for projects eligible for loan guarantees under section 1703 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. This loan authority is open to all currently eligible Title 17 Innovative Clean Energy technology categories, including fossil energy and nuclear energy, and ne w categories of activities, including critical 
minerals processing, manufacturing, and recycling. 
Funding Amount:  $3,600,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loan Guarantees  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: States, Counties, Cities / Townships, Special Districts, Tribal Governments 
(federally recognized), Tribal Governments (other than federally recognized), Independent School Districts, Public Higher-Ed Institutions, Privat e Higher -Ed Institutions, Public Housing 
Authorities, Indian Housing Authorities, Nonprofits with 501(c)(3) status, Nonprofits without 501(c)(3) status, Small Businesses, Businesses (other than small businesses) 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Undergoing rulemaking process to define eligible uses. Innovation requirement 
applies absent State Energy Financing Institution exemption. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A. Loan guarantee cannot exceed 80% of eligible project costs. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 81.126  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  25 Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Loan Programs Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50145 
Program Description: To support Tribal investment in energy-related projects by providing direct loans or partial loan guarantees to federally recognized Tribes, including Alaska Native villages or regional or village corporations, or a Tribal Energy Development Organization that is wholly or substantially owned by a federally recognized Indian T ribe or Alaska Native 
Corporation. The Inflation Reduction Act increased the total  loan authority from $2 billion to 
$20 billion and provides $75 million to carry out the program. 
Funding Amount:  $75,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loan Guarantees  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: DOE ’s Tribal energy financing is available to eligible Indian T ribes or 
entities, including Alaska Native village or regional or village corporations, or other financial 
institutions or T ribes meeting cert ain criteria established by DOE, that are able to demonstrate 
being eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians, or their wholly- owned entities with appropriate legal authority.  
In addition, a Tribal Energy Development Organization (TEDO) that is wholly or substantially owned by a federally recognized T ribe is eligible.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  DOE can support a broad range of projects and activities for the development of 
energy resources, products, and services that utilize commercial technology (innovative technology is permitted but not required). The following non-exclusive list of potential types of eligible projects is provided for illustrative purposes only: e lectricity generation, transmission 
and/or distribution facilities, utilizing renewable or conventional energy sources; e nergy storage 
facilities, whether or not integrated with any of the above; energy resource extraction, refining, or processing facilit ies; energy transportation facilities, including pipelines; district heating and 
cooling facilities; c ogeneration facilities; distributed energy project portfolios, including 
portfolios of smaller distributed generation and storage facilities employed pursuant to a unified business plan. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 81.126  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 26 Revitalizing American Manufacturing to Build the 
Clean Energy Economy  
 
Implementation of the Inflation Reduction Act presents an historic opportunity to advance 
America ’s economic and foreign policy objectives. As we invest billions of dollars to accelerate  
deployment of clean energy technologies across the country, the Administration is committed to designing programs that boost domestic manufacturing, create good -paying jobs , and reduce the 
country’ s dependence on foreign nations for critical components of the clean energy supply 
chain. President Biden made a promise to re -energize American manufacturing, and the Inflation 
Reduction Act makes good on that promise.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act includes several funding and tax programs to boost domestic manufacturing of clean energy technologies and create good -paying manufacturing jobs that 
have staying power , including for those who are historically underrepresented in this field. 
Highlights include:   
• Up to $250 billion in new loan authority for Energy Infrastructure Reinvestment Financing.  The Inflation Reduction Act  provides the Department of Energy with $5 
billion in credit subsidy to support up to $250 billion  in new loan authority to guarantee 
loans to projects that retool, repower, repurpose, or replace energy infrastructure that has ceased operations or that enable operating energy infrastructure to avoid, reduce, use, or sequester greenhouse gases. This new program could support a variety of projects, such as building clean energy facilities on former coal mining sites, reconductoring transmission lines, or updating operating energy facilities with pollution control technologies. This program could offer particular benefits to energy communities. 
• Extension and Expansion of the  Advanced Energy Project Credit . The Inflation 
Reduction Act provide s the Secretary of the Treasury with new authority to allocate $10 
billion to projects that (1) re -equip, expand, or establish an industrial or manufacturing 
facility for the production or recycling of a range of renewable energy and ener gy 
efficiency equipment, carbon capture equipment, and advanced vehicles; (2) re- equip an 
industrial or manufacturing facility with equipment designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 percent; or  (3) re -equip, expand, or establish an indus trial facility 
for the processing, refining, or recycling of critical materials. The law requires the Secretary of the Treasury to set aside 40 percent of the qualified investments for projects in energy communities  where a coal mine or coal -fired electric  generating unit has 
closed .  
• A new Advanced Manufacturing Production Credit. The Inflation Reduction Act 
creates  a new production tax credit for domestic manufacturing of components along the 
supply chain for solar modules, wind turbines, battery cells and modules, and critical 
minerals  processing.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  27  
The Advanced Energy Project Credit  (48C) and Advanced Manufacturing Production 
Credit  (45X) are eligible for direct pay and transferability. Section 13801 of the Inflation 
Reduction Act, adding Section 6417 of the Internal Revenue Code, extend s many of the law ’s 
tax incentives , including the 48C and 45X credits, to entities that generally do not benefit from 
income tax credits, such as state, local, and T ribal governments and other tax -exempt entities.  
Certain businesses also can elect to receive the 45X tax credit s in the form of direct payments. 
Section 13801 also adds Section 6418 of the Internal Revenue Code and makes certain tax 
credits transferable. In these cases, taxpayers that are generally ineligible for direct payment of 
credits may transfer all or a portion of certain credits to an unrelated party in exchange for cash.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the 
Treasury , Department of 
Energy  13501  48C Advanced Energy Project Credit  $10,000,000,000  
Department of the Treasury  13502  45X Advanced Manufacturing Production Credit  - 
Department of Energy  50144  - Energy Infrastructure Reinvestment 
Financing  $5,000,000,000  
Department of Energy  30001  - Enhanced Use of Defense Production Act  $250,000,000  
Department of Energy  50173  - Availability of High -Assay Low -Enriched 
Uranium (HALEU)  $700,000,000  
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  28 Advanced Energy Project Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury , Department of Energy 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  13501 
Tax Code Location:  26 U.S. Code § 48C 
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for investments in advanced energy projects, as defined in 26 USC § 48C(c)(1). 
Period of Availability:  The credit is available when the application and certification process 
begins and ends when credits are fully allocated. Tax Mechanism:  Allocated investment credit. 48C provides $10 billion of allocations, at least 
$4 billion of which must be allocated in energy communities. New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. 48C had been enacted in 2009 but was 
fully allocated after the 2nd allocation round in 2013. The Inflation Reduction Act  provides $10 
billion of allocations, directs a minimum share to energy communities, and expands eligibility to new types of projects. 
Eligible Recipients: A project that (1) re -equips, expands, or establishes an industrial or 
manufacturing facili ty for the production or recycling of a range of clean energy equipment and 
vehicles; (2) re-equips an industrial or manufacturing facility with equipment designed to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 percent; or (3) re -equips, expands, or est ablishes an 
industrial facility for the processing, refining, or recycling of critical materials.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 6% of taxpayer’s qualifying investment 
Bonus Credit Amount:  Businesses can claim a 30% credit for projects meeting prevailing wage 
and registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available 
here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian T ribal governments; Alaska Na tive Corporations; and rural 
electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Cannot claim 45X credit for property produced at facilities that received the 48C 
credit.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  29 Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Energy Security Tax Credits for 
Manufacturing Under Sections 48C and 45X  (10/5/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  30 Advanced Manufacturing Production Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Loc ation: 13502 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45X  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a production tax credit for domestic manufacturing of components for solar and wind energy, inverters, battery components, and critical minerals. 
Period of Availability:  Credit for critical minerals is permanent starting in 2023. For other 
items, the full credit is available between 2023 -2029 and phases down over 2030-2032. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Domestic manufacturers  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: Varies by technology Bonus Credit Amount:  None 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations, states, political subdivisions, the 
Tennessee Valley Authority, Indian Tribal governments, Alaska Native Corporations, and rural 
electricity co -ops (applicable entities). Entities other than applicable entities are eligible for up to 
5 years of direct pay (which expires at the end of 2032) for tax years after December 31, 2022 in which they produce eligible components if they make an election.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Cannot claim 45X credit for property produced at facilities that received the Inflation Reduction Act 48C credit.  
Relevant Announcements:  
Request for Comments on Energy Security Tax Credits for 
Manufacturing Under Sections 48C and 45X  (10/5/2022) 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  31 Energy Infrastructure Reinvestment Financing  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Loan Programs Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50144 
Program Description: To guarantee loans to projects that retool, repower, repurpose, or replace energy infrastructure that has ceased operations or that enable operating energy infrastructure to avoid, reduce, utilize, or sequester air pollutants or anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases. IRA places a total cap on loan guarantees of up to $250 billion and appropriates $5 billion in credit subsidy to support these loans under section 1706 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. 
Funding Amount:  $5,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loan Guarantees  
New or Existing Program:  New 
Eligible Recipients: Program design and rulemaking is underway to refine definition of eligible 
recipients. Anticipated: States, Counties, Cities / Townships, Special Districts, Tribal Governments (federally recognized), Tribal Governments (other than federally recognized), Independent School Districts, Public Higher- Ed Institutions, Private Higher -Ed Institutions, 
Public Housing Authorities, Indian Housing Authorities, Nonprofits with 501(c)(3) status, Nonprofits without 501(c)(3) status, Small Businesse s, Businesses (other than small businesses)  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Projects that retool, repower, repurpose, or replace energy infrastructure that has 
ceased operations, or enable operating energy infrastructure to avoid, reduce, utilize, or sequester air pollutants or anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases. Potential projects could include repurposing shuttered fossil energy facilities for clean energy production, retooling infrastructure from power plants that have ceased operations for new clean energy uses, or updating operating energy infrastructure with emissions control technologies, including carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS). 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A. Loan limits to be established via rulemaking.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  32 Enhanced Use of Defense Production Act of 1950  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  30001 
Program Description: Section 30001 appropriates $500 million to carry out the Defense Production Act (DPA) . President Biden issued presidential determinations providing the 
Department of Energy (DOE) with the authority to use $250,000,000 of the DPA funding to accelerate domestic production of key energy technologies. In November 2022, DOE announced
 
a notice of intent and request for information on a proposed $250 million DPA investment to accelerate domestic electric heat pump manufacturing . 
Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2024. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Entities capable of establishing or expanding manufacturing capacity. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  New domestic production facilities projects for heat pumps (air- or ground-
source), heat pump water heaters, or heat pump system components where domestic production 
would address a clear supply-chain vulnerability. This focus area includes investment in workforce needed to support manufacturing through partnerships with labor unions and other workforce groups, apprenticeship programs, and pre-apprenticeship programs. Renovation of existing production facilities projects to transition from manufacture of other HVAC systems or water heating equipment that use fossil energy to produce electric heat pumps, heat pump water heaters, or heat pump system components. This focus area includes investment in workforce that can transition to support manufacturing of electric heat pumps through partnerships with labor unions and other workforce groups, apprenticeship programs, and pre-apprenticeship programs. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Limited to applicants seeking assistance for up to 50% of the cost 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
Relevant Announcements :  Biden -Harris Administration Announces $250 Million Investment 
from Inflation Reduction Act for Dom estic Heat Pump 
Manufacturing ( 11/2/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  33 Availability of High -Assay Low -Enriched Uranium (HALEU)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Nuclear Energy  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50173 
Program Description: To support the High-Assay Low- Enriched Uranium (HALEU) 
Availability Program activities directed in section 2001 of the Energy Act of 2020, including supporting the establishment of a diverse, market-based supply chain for HALEU. The HALEU Availability Prog ram is essential to the demonstration and commercial deployment of advanced 
reactors, including two demonstration projects that received approximately $2.5 billion in funding through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. 
Funding Amount:  $700,000,000 
Period of  Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: States, Counties, Cities / Townships, Special Districts, Tribal Governments 
(federally recognized), Tribal Governments (other than federally recognized), Independent School Districts, Public Higher-Ed Institutions, Private Higher-Ed Institutions, Public Housing Authorities, Indian Housing Authorities, Nonprofits with 501(c)(3) status, Nonprofits - without 501(c)(3) status, Small Businesses, Businesses (other than small businesses), and/or individuals. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Acquisition of HALEU, activities that support transportation of HALEU, and 
activities to support the availability of h igh-assay low -enriched uranium for civilian domestic 
research, development, demonstration, and commercial use. Cost Share Requirements:  Between 20% -50% on the financial assistance/grant depending on 
developmental or demonstration driven by the Energy Act of 2005. $200 million  of the $700 
million  is well suited for cost -shared financial assistance.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 81.009 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  34 Investing in America ’s Electricity Grid  
 
An affordable, reliable, and clean electricity grid requires a historic investment in new and 
upgraded transmission lines. An estimated  70 percent of the grid’s transmission lines and power 
transformers are more than 25 years old, making American communiti es, critical infrastructure, 
and the economy endure wasteful  inefficiencies and experience disruptions in the face of 
extreme weather . The Inflation Reduction Act invests nearly $3 billion in the U.S. transmission 
system to help overcome the financial and permitting challenges that hinder the buildout of new high- capacity lines. These investments will not only address critical vulnerabilities but also 
connect  Americans to cleaner and cheaper power, advancing the Biden -Harris Administration ’s 
ambitious goal of 100 percent carbon pollution-free electricity by 2035. 
The funding in the Inflation Reduction Act builds on historic grid investments in the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law , including the Transmission Facilitation Program and the 
Grid Resilience 
Innovation Partnership, to help build transformative projects that modernize and increase the 
reliability of the power grid and provide American communities and businesses with better  
access to affordable, reliable, clean electricity . In January 2022, the Administration launched the 
Building a Better Grid Initiative  to mobilize these and other resources and  to support nationwide 
development of new and upgraded transmission lines. Additionally, the Department of Energy created the 
Grid and Transmission Programs Conductor  to provide updated information on the 
application process for funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Inflation Reduction Act, and other federal financing programs.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act redoubles the Biden -Harris Administration ’s commitment to 
modernize America ’s electricity grid  and accelerate buildout of long- distance transmission lines . 
Highlights include:   
• $2 billion for transmission facility financing. This funding will allow the Department of Energy to carry out a direct loan program for the construction or modification of electric transmission facilities designated by the Secretary to be in the national interest.  
• $760 million in grants to facilitate the siting of interstate transmission lines . With this 
funding from the Inflation Reduction Act, the Department  of Energy will be able to 
provide grants to siting authorities to study the impacts of potential transmission lines, identif y alternative siting corridors, and take other actions that reduce the time to site and 
permit a transmission project. The Department of Energy also can provide grants to a siting authority and other state, local, or Tribal governmental entities for econom ic 
development activities in communities that may be affected by the construction  and 
operation of a transmission project. 
See the table on the next page for a full list of the programs summarized in this chapter.  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  35 Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Energy  50151  Transmission Facility Financing  $2,000,000,000  
Department of Energy  50152  Grants to Facilitate the Siting of Interstate Electricity 
Transmission Lines  $760,000,000  
Department of Energy  50153  Interregional and Offshore Wind Electricity Transmission Planning, Modeling and Analysis  $100,000,000  
 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  36 Transmission Facility Financing  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Grid Deployment Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50151 
Program Description:  To carry out a direct loan program for transmission facility financing for 
the construction or modification of electric transmission facilities designated by the Secretary to 
be in the national interest under section 216(a) of the Federal Power Act. 
Funding Amount:  $2,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2030. DOE shall not enter 
into loan agreements that could result in disbursements after September 30, 2031. Funding Mechanism:  Loan  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Trans mission Developers 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Construction or modification of transmission facilities designated by the 
Secretary to be in the national interest under section 216(a) of the Federal Power Act. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula  Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  37 Grants to Facilitate the Siting of Interstate Electricity Transmission Lines  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Grid Deployment Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50152 
Program Description:  To facilitate siting of transmission projects by providing grants to siting 
authorities to expedite the siting and permitting process and providing grants for economic 
development activities in communities that may be affected by a transmission project.  
Funding Amount:  $760,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2029, provided that the 
Secretary shall not enter into any grant agreement pursuant to this section that could result in any outlays after September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Transmission siting authority, or other state, local, or Tribal governmental 
entity  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  (1) Grants to siting authorities for analysis, examination of alternative siting 
corridors, participation in regulatory proceedings in other jurisdictions related to a transmission 
project, or other measures that reduce the time to site and permit a transmission project. A siting authority must agree, in writing, to reach a final siting or permitting decision not later than 2 years after the date on which a grant is provided. (2) Grants for economic development activit ies 
for communities that may be affected by the construction and operation of transmission projects. The Secretary may only disburse grant funds for economic development activities to (a ) a siting 
authority upon approval by the siting authority of the transmission project; and (b) to any other state, local, or Tribal governmental entity upon commencement of construction of the transmission project.  
Cost Share Requirements : Federal cost share shall not exceed 50% for grants to siting 
authorities for particip ation in regulatory proceedings in other jurisdictions and at FERC. No 
specified cost share requirement for other grants under this provision. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  38 Interregional and Offshore Wind Electricity Transmission Planning, 
Modeling and Analysis  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Grid Deployment Office 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50153 
Program Description:  To conduct transmission planning, modeling, and analysis regarding 
interregional electricity transmission and transmission of electricity  generated by offshore wind 
and to convene relevant stakeholders to discuss these issues. 
Funding Amount:  $100,000,000 
Period of A vailability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  N/A 
Tribal Eligibility:  N/A 
Eligible Uses:  Funding to (1) convene relevant stakeholders and (2) conduc t transmission 
planning, modeling, and analysis of interregional and offshore wind transmission. Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 39 Investing in Affordable and Reliable Clean Energy in 
Rural America and on Tribal Lands  
 
Nearly one in six Americans —approximately 55 million people —live in a remote or rural 
community. Underserved rural and Tribal communities  may pay more for energy as a percentage 
of their household income  and may not have the resources —individually or as community—to  
invest in clean electricity systems. Additionally, many rur al people receive their electricity from 
nonprofit electric cooperatives that often rely on older coal -fired power plants and have  taken on 
significant debt.  
The Inflation Reduction Act provides more than $12 billion to partner with rural and Tribal 
commu nities to help them access more clean energy, make their energy systems more reliable 
and resilient, and lower their electricity costs.   
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act invests in rural and Tribal communities to expand access to affordable clean energy that cuts pollution and reduces energy costs for families. Highlights include:  
• $9.7 billion for the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) elect ric infrastructure 
loan and loan guarantee program for  rural electric cooperatives.  This funding will 
support rural electric cooperatives  that achieve greenhouse gas emissions reductions by 
making energy efficiency improvements to electric generation and t ransmission systems 
or purchas ing and deploy ing clean  energy and carbon capture and storage systems.  
• $1 billion for electric infrastructure loans for renewable energy  in Rural America , 
which will finance the construction of distribution, transmission, and generation facilities  
for renewable electricity (from solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, or geothermal) , 
including system improvements and replacement s to improve service  in rural areas, as 
well as demand side management, energy conservation, and r enewable energy systems. 
• More than $2 billion to expand USDA ’s Rural Energy for America Program 
(REAP).  REAP provides guaranteed loan financing and grant funding to agricultural 
producers and rural small businesses for renewable energy systems or energy efficiency improvements. The Inflation Reduction Act sets aside a portion of this funding for underutilized renewable energy technologies.  
• $150 million to the Tribal Electrification Program at the Department of the Interior. This funding for Tribes and Tribal organi zations will support the powering of 
unelectrified Tribal homes with zero -emissions energy systems and retrofitting of already 
electrified Tribal homes to zero -emissions systems.  
 
See the table on the next page for a full list of the programs summarized in this chapter.   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  40 Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Agriculture  22001  Electric Loans for Renewable Energy  $1,000,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22002(a)  Rural Energy for America Program (REAP) $1,721,632,500  
Department of Agriculture  22002(b)  Rural Energy for America Program (REAP) - 
Underutilized Renewable Energy Technologies  $303,817,500  
Department of Agriculture  22004  USDA Assistance for Rural Electric Cooperatives  $9,700,000,000  
Department of the Interior  80003  Tribal Electrification Program  $150,000,000  
 
    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  41 Electric Loans for Renewable Energy  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Rural Utilities Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  22001 
Program Description:  To finance the construction of electric distribution, transmission, and 
generation facilities, including system improvements and replacements required to furnish and 
improve electric service in rural areas, as well as d emand side management, energy conservation 
programs, and on-grid and off- grid renewable energy systems.  
Funding Amount:  $1,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loans, Loan Forgiveness 
New or E xisting Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  State and local governmental entities; Federally -recognized Tribes; 
Nonprofits, including cooperatives and limited dividend or mutual associations; For- profit 
businesses (must be a corporation or limited liability company) 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  For cost of loan projects under Section 317 of the Rural Electrification Act of 
1936 (7 U.S.C. 940g) for facilities that generate renewable electricity (from solar, wind, 
hydropower, biomass, or geothermal source) for resale to rural and nonrural residents. Includes projects that store electricity in support of 317 loan projects . 
Cost Share Requirements:  Up to 50%, but may be waived at the discretion of the Secretary . 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.859 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  42 Rural Energy for America Program (REAP)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Rural Business- Cooperative Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  22002(a) 
Program Description:  To provide guaranteed loan financing and grant funding to agricultural 
producers and rural small businesses for renewable energy systems or to make energy efficiency 
improvements. Agricultural producers may also apply for new energy efficient equipment and new system loans for agricultural production and processing. 
Funding Amount:  $1,721,632,500 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Rural small businesses, agricultural producers 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Funds may be used for renewable energy systems, such as biomass (e.g., biodiesel 
and ethanol, anaerobic digesters, solid fuels); geothermal for electric generation or direct use; 
hydropower below 30 MW; hydrogen; small and large wind generation; small and large solar generation; ocean (tidal, current, thermal) generation. Funds also may be used for the purchase, installation and construction of energy efficiency improvements, such as high efficiency heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems (HVAC); insulation; lighting; cooling or refrigeration units; doors and windows; electric, solar or gravity pumps for sprinkler pivots; switching from a diesel to electric irrigation motor; replacement of energy -inefficient equipment.  
Agricultural producers may use guaranteed loan funds to install energy efficient equipment and systems for agricultural production or processing. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Up to 50% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.868 
Relevant Announcements : USDA Invests in Critical Infrastructure to Lower Costs, Create 
Jobs, and Combat Climate Change Across Rural America (12/15/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  43 Rural Ene rgy for America Program (REAP) –  
Underutilized Renewable Energy Technologies  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office:  Rural Business- Cooperative Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  22002(b) 
Program Description:  To provide guaranteed loan financing and grant funding to agricultural 
producers and rural small businesses for underutilized renewable energy technologies. 
Funding Amount:  $303,817,500 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Rural small businesses, agricultural producers 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Underutilized renewable energy technologies 
Cost Share Requirements:  Up to 50% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : 10.868 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  44 USDA Assistance for Rural Electric Cooperatives  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Rural Utilities Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  22004 
Program Description:  To fund the construction of electric distribution, transmission, and 
generation facilities for rural electric cooperatives, including system improvements and 
replacement s that achieve the greatest reduction in  carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide 
emissions in rural areas, as well as demand side management, energy conservation programs, and on-grid and off-grid renewable energy systems. 
Funding Amount:  $9,700,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loans, modifications of loans, the cost of loans and modifications, and 
other financial assistance (including grants) New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Electric cooperatives that are or  have been Rural Utilities Service 
borrowers; electric cooperatives serving a predominantly rural area; or a wholly or jointly owned 
subsidiary of such cooperatives. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Loans, modifications of loans (including debt relief), and other financial 
assistance (including grants) to achieve the greatest reduction in carbon dioxide, methane, and 
nitrous oxide emissions associated with rural electric systems through the purchase of renewable energy, renewable energy systems, zero -emission systems, and carbon capture and storage 
systems, to deploy such systems, or to make energy efficiency improvements to electric generation and transmission systems of the eligible entity. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Varies, depen ding on product 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.859 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  45 Tribal Electrification Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Indian Affairs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  80003 
Program Description:  To provide financial and technical assistance to Tribes to increase the 
number of Tribal homes with zero- emission electricity.  
Funding Amount:  $150,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain avail able through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts, or Financial Assistance 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  and Tribes  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  For (1) the provision of electricity to unelectrified Tribal homes through zero-
emissions energy systems; (2) transitioning electrified Tribal homes to zero -emissions energy 
systems; and (3) associated home repairs and retrofitting necessary to insta ll the zero -emissions 
energy systems. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  46 Incentivizing and Supporting Deployment of Clean 
Vehicles  
 
The transportation sector is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions  in the United States, 
accounting for 27 percent of all emissions in 2020. Transportation also  is a major source of 
smog- forming  nitrogen oxides and particul ate matter, which can trigge r asthma attacks and other 
health problems for the most vulnerable among us. President Biden set a goal  that at least  50 
percent of all new passenger cars and light trucks sold in 2030 be zero-emission vehicles, 
including battery electric, plug- in hybrid electric, or fuel cell electric vehicles  (EVs). In October 
2022, President Biden announced the American Battery Materials Initiative , a new effort to 
mobilize the entire government in securing a reliable and sustainable supply of critical minerals used for power and electric vehicles. The Inflation Reduction Act tackles these priorities comprehensively, by combin ing incentives for consumers and businesses to purchase clean 
vehicles with  programs to expand manufacturing and sourcing of vehicle components and critical 
minerals  in the United States.  
The investments in the Inflation Reduction Act build on  the $7.5 billion provided by the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to deploy a national network of 500,000 electric vehicle chargers; more than $7 billion to ensur e domestic manufacturers have the critical minerals and other 
components necessary to make EV batteries; and $10 billion for clean transit and school buses at the 
Department of Transportation and Environmental Protection Agency . The CHIPS and 
Science Act invests in expanding America ’s manufacturing capacity for the semiconductors used 
in electric vehicles  and chargers. Together, this package of legislation will create good jobs along 
the full supply chain for the automotive sector, from components and equipment manufacturing and processing to final assembly, and incentivize the development of reliable EV battery supply chains . It also will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and other air pollutants from cars and 
trucks, which have a disproportionate impact on the air quality in low- income communities and 
communities of color. 
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act provides billions of dollars in consumer incentives to put more clean vehicles on the road and commits to making more of those vehicles and their components in the United States. Highlights include:  
• Clean Vehicle Credit  for consumers purchasing new qualifying clean vehicles, including 
battery electric, plug -in hybrid, or fuel cell electric vehicles. To qualify for the maximum 
$7,500 credit, the vehicle must meet certain standards for North American assembly; the  
battery ’s components must meet certain standards for manufacturing or as sembly; and the 
battery ’s critical minerals must meet certain requirements for sourcing or processing in 
the United States or  from trusted trade partners.  
• Previously -Owned Clean Vehicles Credit  to support used vehicle buyers who choose to 
go electric. Most  families in the United States buy used, and this first-of-kind credit of up 
to $4,000 will make it more affordable to go electric and save money at the pump. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  47 • Commercial Clean Vehicles Credit  to defray up to 30 percent of the cost of replacing 
diesel - or g as-powered commercial vehicles —ranging from cars and pick-up trucks to 
long-haul trucks—with electric vehicles. A commercial vehicle owner choosing to 
replace an existing vehicle with a cleaner but not fully electric alternative is eligible for a credit of  up to 15 percent. 
• Three programs to grow the domestic supply chain for clean vehicles. The Inflation Reduction Act includes billions  of dollars to support vehicle manufacturers looking to 
expand their domestic production of clean  vehicles. The Inflation R eduction Act provides
 
$3 billion to the Department of Energy’ s Advanced Technology Vehicle 
Manufacturing Loan Program  for loans to manufacture clean vehicles and their 
components in the United States, including newly authorized uses from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, such as medium- and heavy- duty vehicles, locomotives, maritime 
vessels, aviation, and hyperloop. The Inflation Reduction Act also provides $2 billion to the Department  of Energy for Domestic Manufacturing Conversion Grants , which will 
fund manufacturers’ retooling of production lines for clean vehicles. As described 
earlier  
in this guidebook, the law also creates a new Advanced Manufacturing Production Credit  for the domestic production and sale of qualified components for clean  energy 
projects, including batteries and critical minerals.  
• $1 billion for the Clean Heavy- Duty Vehicle Program  at the Environmental Protection 
Agency. This program will invest $1 billion to help Tribal, state, and local governments and other entities offset the cost of replacing heavy-duty Class 6 and 7 commercial vehicles with zero -emission vehicle s, deploy supporting infrastructure, and train and 
develop the necessary workforce. At least $400 million must go to areas not meeting national air quality standards. (This program is described in more detail later in the guidebook on page 8 8
). 
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13401  30D Clean Vehicle Credit  - 
Department of the Treasury  13402  25E Credit for Previously -Owned Clean Vehicles  - 
Department of the Treasury  13403  45W  Credit for Qualified  Commercial Clean 
Vehicles  - 
Department of the Treasury  13404  30C Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property 
Credit  - 
Department of Energy  50142  - Advanced Technology Vehicle 
Manufacturing Loan Program  $3,000,000,000  
Department of Energy  50143  - Domestic Manufacturing Conversion Grants  $2,000,000,000  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2 48 The Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property Credit ( 30C) and Credit for Qualified 
Commercial Clean Vehicles ( 45W)  are eligible for direct pay. S ection 13801 of the Inflation 
Reduction Act, adding Section 6417 of the Internal Revenue Code, extend s many of the law ’s 
tax incentives , including the 30C and 45W credits,  to entities that generally do not benefit from 
income tax credits, such as state, local, and T ribal governments  and other tax -exempt entities. 
Specifically, these entities can elect to receive these tax credits in the form of direct payments. 
The 30C  tax credit also is  transferable. S ection 13801 adds Section 6418 of the Internal 
Revenue Code and makes certain tax credits transferable. T axpayers that are generally ineligible 
for direct payment of credits may transfer all or a portion of certain cre dits to an unrelated party 
in exchange for cash. As provided in other sections of the Inflation Reduction Act , starting in 
2024, buyers of new and pre -owned clean vehicles may transfer the Clean Vehicle Credit  (30D) 
and Credit for Previously -Owned Clean Ve hicles ( 25E) to dealers in exchange for a reduction 
in price at the point of sale.   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  49 Clean Vehicle Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13401 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 30D  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for purchasers of clean vehicles.  
Period of Availability:  Generally, vehicles placed in service in 2023-2032. Some of the 30D 
rules have differing timeframes.  
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit for consumers 
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. Credit extended with new rules pertaining 
to final assembly in the United States, critical minerals/battery components, and foreign entities of concern. Per manufacturer limit is lifted.  
Eligible Recipients: The ta x credit is not available for consumers who have adjusted gross 
incomes for the current or preceding year above $300,000 (couples), $225,000 (heads of household), $150,000 (singles). Not inflation adjusted. 
Tribal Eligibility : Yes, point of sale transfer t o registered dealers (definition of “ dealer ” 
includes persons licensed by Indian Tribal governments to engage in the sale of vehicles) Base Credit Amount: $0 Bonus Credit Amount:  $3,750 credit for vehicles meeting critical minerals requirement. The 
vehicle must contain a threshold percentage of critical minerals extracted or processed in the 
United States or in a country with which the United States has a free trade agreement, or recycled in North America. Additional $3,750 credit for vehicles meeting the requirement that a threshold percentage of battery components be manufactured or assembled in North America. Vehicles must meet other requirements, including final assembly in Nort h America and MSRP limits 
(generally $55,000; for vans, SUVs, and pickups $80,000). Starting in 2024, qualifying vehicles cannot have battery components manufactured or assembled by a foreign entity of concern. Starting in 2025, qualifying vehicles ’ batter ies cannot contain critical minerals extracted, 
processed, or recycled by a foreign entity of concern. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: Yes . Starting in 2024, transferable only to the dealer at point of sale under 
section 30D(g) but not under section 6418.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  50 Stackability: Cannot claim both 30D credit and 45W credit.  
Relevant Announcements:  Plug- in Electric Drive Vehicle Credit at a Glance  (8/16/2022) 
Frequently Asked Questions on the Inflation Reduction Act’ s 
Initial Changes to the Electric Vehicle Tax Credit  ( 8/16/2022) 
Request for Comments on Credits for Clean Vehicles  (10/5/2022) 
Treasury and IRS set out procedures for manufacturers, sellers of 
clean vehicles  (12/12/2022) 
Frequently Asked Questions About the New, Previously- Owned 
and Qualified Commercial Clean Vehicles Credit  (12/29/2022) 
Notice of Intent to Propose Regulations on the Tax Credit for New 
Clean Vehicles  (12/29/2022) 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  51 Credit for Previously -Owned Clean Vehicles  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13402 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 25E  
Tax Provision Description: To provide a tax credit for purchasers of pre- owned clean vehicles  
Period of Availability:  Generally, vehicles placed in service in 2023-2032. 
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit for consumers 
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Tax credit is not available for consumers who have adjusted gross incomes 
for the current or preceding year above $150,000 (couples), $112,500 (heads of household), $75,000 (singles). Individuals can claim only once per three years. Vehicles must be sold by a dealer; the sale price must be $25,000 or less; and it can only be claimed once per vehicle.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes, point of sale transfer to registered dealers (definition of “ dealer ” 
includes persons licensed by Indian Tribal governments to engage in the sale of vehicles ) 
Base Credit Amount: The lesser of $4,000 or 30% of sale price 
Bonus Credit Amount:  None 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: Yes . Starting in 2024, transferable only to the dealer at point of sale under 
section 25E(f) but not under section 6418.  
Stackability: No rules  
Relevant Announcements:  Request for Comments on Credits for Clean Vehicles
 (10/5/2022) 
Treasury and IRS set out procedures for manufacturers, sellers of 
clean vehicles  (12/12/2022) 
Frequently Asked Questions About the New, Previously- Owned 
and Qualified Commercial Clean Vehicles Credit  (12/29/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  52 Credit for Qualified Com mercial Clean Vehicles  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13403 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45W  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for purchasers of qualified commercial clean 
vehicles  
Period of Availability:  Vehicles placed in service after 1/1/23 and acquired before 1/1/33. 
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit for commercial use or lease  
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Businesses that acquire motor vehicles or mobile machinery for use o r 
lease; tax -exempt entities that acquire them for use.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: The amount of the credit is the lesser of (a) 15% of the vehicle’ s basis 
(i.e. its cost to the purchaser) or 30% for vehicles without internal combustion engines, or (b) the amount the purchase price exceeds the price of a comparable internal combustion vehicle. The credit is capped at $7,500 for vehicles < 14,000 lbs and $40,000 for all other clean vehicles. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  None 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for states, political subdivisions,  tax-exempt organizations (other 
than co -ops described in section 521), and Indian Tribal governments.  
Transferability: No  
Stackability: Cannot claim both the 30D credit and 45W credit. Relevant Announcements:   
Request for Comments on Section 45W Credit for Qualified 
Commercial Clean Vehicles  (11/3/2022) 
Treasury and IRS Set Out P rocedures for Manufacturers, S ellers of 
Clean V ehicles  (12/12/2022) 
Frequently Asked Questions About the New, Previously- Owned 
and Qualified Commercial Clean Vehicles Credit  (12/29/2022) 
Notice on the “I ncremental Cost” of V ehicles E ligible for the 
Commercial C lean V ehicle T ax Credit (12/29/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  53 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13404 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 30C  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for alternative fuel vehicle refueling and 
charging property in low- income and rural areas. Alternative fuels include electricity, ethanol, 
natural gas, hydrogen, biodiesel, and others. 
Period of Availability:  January 1, 2023-December 31, 2032 
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit for consumers and businesses. 
New or Modified Provision: Extended and modified to include prevai ling wage and registered  
apprenticeship requirements for businesses claiming the credit. Adds bidirectional charging 
equipment, charging equipment for 2- and 3- wheel electric vehicles. Limited to low -income and 
non-urban areas.  
Eligible Recipients: The qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling property must be for clean-burning fuels, as defined in the statute, and must be located in low- income or rural areas.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 6% of the cost for businesses, limited to  a $100,000 credit  per item of 
property for businesses. 30% for individuals, limited to $1,000.  
Bonus Credit Amount:  Businesses can claim a 30% credit for projects meeting prevailing wage 
and registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural 
electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes, for property used in a trade or business. 
Stackab ility: No rules 
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Section 30C Alternative Fuel Vehicle 
Refueling Property Credit  (11/3/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  54 Advanced Technology Vehicle Manufacturing Loan Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Loan Programs Office  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50142 
Program Description:  To provide loans to support the manufacture of eligible advanced 
technology vehicles and components under the Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing 
Loan Program (ATVM), including newly authorized uses from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Expanded uses include medium- and heavy-duty vehicles, locomotives , maritime vessels 
including offshore wind vessels, aviation, and hyperloop. IRA removed the $25 billion cap on ATVM loans and appropriates $3 billion in credit subsidy to support these loans. 
Funding Amount:  $3,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2028. 
Funding Mechanism:  Loans 
New or Existing Program:  Existing with Substantive Modifications 
Eligible Recipients:  A manufacturer of eligible vehicles or of components or materials that 
support eligible vehicles ’ fuel economy performance. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Manufacturing a range of advanced technology vehicles and their components, 
including light-duty vehicle s, medium- and heavy- duty vehicles, locomotives, maritime vessels 
including offshore wind vessels, aviation, and hyperloop. The Inflation Reduction Act specifies 
that funds may be used for the costs of providing direct loans for reequipping, expanding, or establishing a manufacturing facility in the United States to produce advanced technology vehicles only if those vehicles emit, under any possible operational mode or condition, low or zero exhaust emissions of greenhouse gases.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A. Loan amount cannot exceed 80% of eligible project costs. 
Formula Fun ding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  55 Domestic Manufacturing Conversion Grants  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50143 
Program Description:  To provide cost-shared grants for domestic production of efficient 
hybrid, plug-in electric hybrid, plug- in electric drive, and hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles.  
Funding Amount:  $2,000,000,000 
Period o f Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Recipients should be manufacturing for eligible vehicle types. Includes 
small businesses, businesses (other than small businesses), and/or individuals. 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Domestic production of efficient hybrid, plug-in electric hybrid, plug- in electric 
drive, and hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles or components for these vehicles. Cost Share Requirements:  50% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  56 Incentivizing and Supporting Development and Use of 
Cleaner Transportation Fuels  
 
Our dynamic economy depends on moving people and goods around through a variety of 
transportation modes. As noted previously, the transportation sector is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions  in the United States, and a bulk of those emissions come from light-
duty vehicles and heavy-duty freight trucks. But experts predict that emissions from the aviation and maritime sectors will steadily increase over the coming decades without policy intervention. In addition to improving efficiency and electrifying transportation modes, one way to re duce 
emissions from this sector —and make American households less vulnerable to the price 
volatility of the oil market—is to make liquid fuels cleaner and diversify their sources. The Inflation Reduction Act includes several tax incentives and programs to increase domestic production of clean biofuels and sustainable aviation fuels.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act incentivizes and invests in a range of non-petroleum- based fuels for 
cars, trucks, and the aviation sector. Highlights include: 
• $500 million for the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program  at the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), the goal of which is to increas e the sale and use of 
higher blends of ethanol and biodiesel. The program will provide grants to improve infrastructure for blending, storing, distributing, and supplying biofuels, including higher ethanol and biodiesel blends. This investment builds on the Biden Administration ’s 
efforts
, led by USDA, to expand biofuels infrastructure to open up new market 
opportunities for sustainable fuel sources and lower energy costs for American families. 
• Extension of existing tax incentives for alternative fuels and creation of a new Clean 
Fuel Production Credit . The Inflation Reduction Act extends existing tax incentives for 
a range of alternative fuels, including biodiesel, renewable diesel , and second-generation 
biodiesel, through the end of 2024. Beginning in 2025, a new emissions- based Clean Fuel 
Production Credit w ill take effect to incentivize production of fuels with low life -cycle 
greenhouse gas emissions. Producers can earn bonus credits by meeting prevailing wage 
and registered  apprenticeship requirements. The law also extends and modifies the 
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property Credit, which supports fueling stations in 
low-income and rural areas for alternative liquid fuels as well as electric charging 
stations.  
• Historic incentives and support for sustainable aviation fuels.  The Inflation Reduction 
Act includes a Sustainable Aviation Fuel Credit to incentivize the production of 
sustainable aviation fuels that result in at least  50 percent less greenhouse gas emissions 
than petroleum-based jet fuel. It also includes $297 million for the Alternative Fuel  and 
Low-Emission Aviation Technology Program at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). FAA will award grants to projects that produce, transport, blend, or store sustainable aviation fuel or projects that develop, demonstrate, or apply low- emission 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  57 aviation technologies, which are technologies that significantly improve aircraft fuel 
efficiency or reduce greenhouse gas emissions. These programs are a part of the Biden 
Administration ’s comprehensive strategy to deploy technologies to produce sustainable 
aviation fuels on a commercial scale, including the Sustainable Aviation Fuel Grand 
Challenge , a joint effort of the Department of Energy, Department of Transportation, and 
Department of Agriculture.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13201  40A, 
6426(c), 
6427(e)  Extension of Tax Credits  for Biodiesel and 
Renewable Diesel  - 
Department of the Treasury  13201  6426(d) , 
6426(e) , 
6427(e)  Extension of Tax Credit for Alternative 
Fuels    
Department of the Treasury  13202  40 Extension of Second -Generation Biofuel 
Incentives  - 
Department of the Treasury  13704  45Z Clean Fuel Production Credit  - 
Department of Agriculture  22003  - Biofuel Infrastructure and Agriculture Product Market Expansion (Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program) $500,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60108  - Funding for Section 211 of the Clean Air 
Act $15,000,000  
Department of the Treasury  13203  40B Sustainable Aviation Fuel Credit - 
Department of Transportation  40007(a)(1)  - Fueling Aviation ’s Sustainable Transition 
through Sustainable Aviation Fuels  $244,530,000  
Department of Transportation  40007(a)(2)  - Fueling Aviation ’s Sustainable Transition – 
Technology  $46,530,000  
 
 
The Clean Fuel Production Credit  (45Z) is  eligible for direct pay. Section 13801 of the 
Inflation Reduction Act, adding Section 6417 of the Internal Revenue Code, extend s many of the 
law’s tax  incentives , including the 45Z credit, to entities that generally do not benefit from 
income tax credits,  such as state, local, and Tribal governments and other tax -exempt entities. 
Specifically, these entities can elect to receive these tax credits in the form of direct payments. 
The 45Z tax credit also is transferable. S ection 13801 adds Section 6418 of the Internal 
Revenue Code and makes certain tax credits transferable. T axpayers that are generally ineligible 
for direct payment of credits may transfer all or a portion of certain credits to an unrelated party 
in exchange for cash.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  58 Extension of Tax Credits for Biodiesel and Renewable Diesel  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13201 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 40A, 26 U.S. Code § 6426(c), 26 U.S. Code § 6427(e)  
Tax Provision Description: To provide tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel.   
Period of Availability:  Through 12/31/24 
Tax Mechanism:  Income tax credit and excise tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: Extended from 12/31/2022 through 12/31/2024. Eligible Recipients: Producers of biodiesel, biodiesel mixtures, and renewable diesel.  
Tribal Eligibility : No 
Base Credit Amount: $1.00 per gallon for biodiesel, biodiesel mixtures, and renewable diesel. 
Additional $0.10 credit for small agri- diesel producers . In addition, there is a $1.00- per-gallon 
excise tax credit for biodiesel and renewable diesel mixtures. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  N/A 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: No rules  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  59 Extension of Tax Credits for Alternative Fuels  
 
 
Federal Agency:  Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13201 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 6426(d), 26 U.S. Code § 6426(e), 26 U.S. Code § 6427(e)  
Tax Provision Description: To provide tax credits for alternative fuels. Period of Availability:  Through 12/31/24 
Tax Mechanism:  Excise tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: Extended from 12/31/2021 through 12/31/2024. Eligible Recipients: Registered producers  
Tribal Eligibility : No 
Base Credit Amount: $0.50 per gallon for alternative fuels and alternative fuel mixtures.  
Bonus Credit Amount:  N/A 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: Fuels eligible for the biodiesel mixture excise tax credit or the income tax credits 
under sections 40A or 40B (sustainable aviation fuels) are not eligible for the alternative fuels or alternative fuels mixture excise tax credits.  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  60 Extension of Second -Generation Biofuel Incentives  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13202 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 40 Tax Provision Description: To provide an income tax credit for second-generation biofuel 
production. 
Period of Availability:  Through 12/31/24 
Tax Mechanism:  Income tax credit (general business credit, nonrefundable) 
New  or Modified Provision: Extended from 12/31/2021 through 12/31/2024. 
Eligible Recipients: Registered producers of second-generation biofuels  
Tribal Eligibility : No 
Base Credit Amount: $1.01 per gallon Bonus Credit Amount:  N/A 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: Fuel eligible for the section 40 credit is not eligible for the credits under section 
40A/6426. 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  61 Clean Fuel Production Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13704 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45Z  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for domestic production of clean 
transportation fuels, including sustainable aviation fuels. 
Period of Availability:  Fuel produced after 12/31/24 and used or sold before 12/31/27. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Registered producers in the United States. Fuels with less than 50 
kilograms of carbon dioxide equivalent per million British thermal units (CO2e per mmBTU) qualify as clean fuels eligible for credits.  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: The base amount is $0.20/gallon for non-aviation fuel and $0.35/gallon for aviation fuel, multiplied by the carbon dioxide “ emissions factor ” of the fuel. Inflation 
adjusted after 2024. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  Credit is 5 times the base amount ($1/gallon for non-aviation fuel, $1.75 
gallon for aviation fuel, multiplied by the emissions factor) for facilities meeting prevailing wage 
and registered  apprenticeship requirements. Inflation adjusted after 2024. Initial guidance on the 
labor provisions is available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations; states; political subdivisions; the 
Tennessee Valley Authority; Indian Tribal governments; Alaska Native Corporations; and rural electricity co -ops.  
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: No rules  
Relevant Announcements:   
Request for Comments on Credits for Clean Hydrogen and Clean 
Fuel Production (11/3/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  62 Biofuel Infrastructure and Agriculture Product Market Expansion  
(Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Rural Business- Cooperative Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  22003 
Program Description:  To provide grants through the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive 
Program, which has the goal of significantly increasing the sales and use of higher blends of 
ethanol and biodiesel by expanding the infrastructure for renewable fuels derived from U.S. agricultural products and by sharing the costs related to building out biofuel- related 
infrastructure . 
Funding Amount:  $500,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Transportation fueling facilities including fueling stations, convenience 
stores, hypermarket fueling stations, fleet facilities (including rail and marine), and similar entities with capital investments; fuel distribution facilities, such as terminal operations, depots, and midstream partners, and similarly equivalent operations.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  (1) Fueling stations, convenience stores, hypermarket fueling stations, fleet 
facilities, and similar entities with capital investments) for eligible implementation activities related to higher blends of fuel ethanol greater than 10 percent ethanol, such as E15 or higher, and biodiesel greater than 5 percent biodiesel, such as B20 or higher; and (2) Terminal operations, depots, and midstream partners, for eligible implementation activities related to higher blends of fuel ethanol greater than 10 percent ethanol, such as E15 or higher, and biodiesel greater than 5 percent biodiesel, such as B20 or higher. 
Cost Share Requirements:  25% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.754 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  63 Funding for Section 211(o) of the Clean Air Act  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60108 
Program Description:  To support investments in advanced biofuels and to implement the 
Renewable Fuel Standard, including developing tests and protocols, collecting data, and 
conducting analysis related to the environmental and public health effects of fuels. 
Funding Amount:  $15,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants and direct federal spending 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Advanced biofuel industry; direct federal spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  To develop tests and protocols regarding effects of fuel and fuel additives; to 
update analyses of lifecycle greenhouse gases of a fuel; to review impacts of transportation fuels 
on the general public and on low-income and disadvantaged c ommunities; to award grants to 
industry and other related activities to support investments in advanced biofuels. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  64 Sustainable Aviation Fuel Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13203 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 40B  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for the sale or  use of sustainable aviation fuel 
(SAF)  that achieves a lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions reduction of at least 50% as compared 
with petroleum- based jet fuel  
Period of Availability:  January 1, 2023-December 31, 2024 
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit  
New or Modifi ed Provision: New  
Eligible Recipients: Producers and blenders of SAF -kerosene fuel mixtures for aviation . 
Qualified SAF mixture must be made  in the United States, and fueling of the aircraft must occur 
in the United States.  
Tribal Eligibility : No 
Base Credit Amount: $1.25/gallon of SAF. Bonus Credit Amount:  Up to $0.50/gallon depending on lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions of 
SAF relative to petroleum -based jet fuel.  
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: Credit can be claim ed against income tax or fuel excise tax. Credit included in 
gross income (similar to alcohol and biodiesel fuels credits).  
Relevant Announcements:   
Treasury, IRS issue guidance on new Sustainable Aviation Fuel 
Credit  (12/19/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  65 Fueling Aviation ’s Sustainable Transition through Sustainable Aviation Fuels 
(FAST -SAF)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Transportation  
Bureau or Office: Federal Aviation Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  40007(a)(1) 
Program Description:  To provide grant funding for eligible entities to carry out projects 
relating to the production, transportation, blending, or storage of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF), with the goal of accelerating the production and use of sustainable aviation fuel and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the aviation sector. 
Funding Amount:  $244,530,000 
Period of Availability:  Available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  (1) a state or local government, including the District of Columbia, other 
than an airport sponsor; (2) an air carrier; (3) an airport sponsor; (4) an accredited institution of 
higher education; (5) a research institution; (6) a person or entity engaged in the production, transportation, blending, or storage of SAF  in the United States or feedstocks in the United States 
that could be used to produce SAF ; (7) a person or entity engaged in the development, 
demonstration, or application of low-emission aviation technologies; or (8) nonprofit entities or nonprofit consortia with experience in SAF , low-emission aviation technologies, or other clean 
transportation research programs. 
Trib al Eligibility:  Yes. Tribal government entities within the definition of eligible s tate or local 
units. Tribal government acting as a nonprofit agency operating under s tate or local auspices.  
Eligible Uses:  (1) Grants to enable exploration and identification of supply chains, 
infrastructure , and distribution needs by key proponents; and (2) Grants for infrastructure 
projects to facilitate and scale fuel production, transportation, blending, storage, and use of SAF. Cost Share Requirements : The f ederal share of the cost of a project shall be 75% of the total 
proposed cost of the project, except that such federal share shall increase to 90% of the total 
proposed cost of the project if the eligible entity is a small hub airport or nonhub airport, as such terms are defined in section 47102 of title 49, United States Code. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  66 Fueling Aviation ’s Sustainable Transition – Technology (FAST -Tech)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Transportation  
Bureau or Office: Federal Aviation Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  40007(a)(2) 
Program Description:  To provide grant funding for eligible entities to carry out projects that 
develop, demonstrate, or apply low-emission aviation technologies, which are technologies that significantly improve aircraft fuel efficiency or reduce greenhouse gas emissions during the operation of civil aircraft.  
Funding Amount:  $46,530,000 
Period of Availabili ty: Available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  (1) a state or local government, including the District of Columbia, other 
than an airport sponsor; (2) an air carrier; (3) an airport sponsor; (4) an accredited institution of higher education; (5) a research institution; (6) a person or entity engaged in the production, transportation, blending, or storage of SAF  in the United States or feedstocks in the United States 
that could be used to produce SAF ; (7) a person or entity engaged in the development, 
demonstration, or application of low-emission aviation technologies; or (8) nonprofit entities or nonprofit consortia with experience in sustainable aviation fuels, low- emission aviation 
techno logies, or other clean transportation research programs. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes. Tribal government entities within the definition of eligible s tate or local 
units. Tribal government acting as a nonprofit agency operating under s tate or local auspices.  
Eligible Uses:  (1) Designing, prototyping, and testing of discrete low emission aviation 
technologies; and (2) Enhancing aircraft and engine technology testing and demonstration capabilities to accelerate development and demonstration of a broad range of low- emission 
aircraft technologies.  
Cost Share Requirements:  The federal share of the cost of a project shall be 75% of the total 
proposed cost of the project, except that such federal share shall increase to 90% of the total proposed cost of the project if the eligible entity is a small hub airport or nonhub airport, as such terms are defined in section 47102 of title 49, United States Code.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  67 Expanding America ’s Leadership in Industrial 
Decarbonization and Carbon Management  
 
The industrial sector is diverse, hard to decarbonize, and contributes nearly one-third of the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions. The most emissions- intensive industrial se ctors —including 
steel, aluminum, and concrete—are also a part of the clean energy and infrastructure supply chain  and are essential  to U.S. national and economic security. Deploying technologies like 
carbon capture and storage (CCS) at scale will be critical for decarbonizing many industrial processes.  
The United States  has the opportunity
 to lead in  clean manufacturing  and scale the use of  low-
carbon materials to produce electric vehicles, wind turbines, and solar panels, rebuild America’ s 
roads and bridges, and upgrade the nation’s buil dings to be more efficient and resilient to climate 
impacts . The  Inflation Reduction Act provides billions of dollars in grants to help decarbonize 
industrial facilities and includes tax credits to expand and improve CCS  and direct air capture 
technologies. This investment complements funding in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which provides 
$12 billion  for carbon management, resea rch, demonstration, and deployment over the 
next five years.  
The law also includes additional funding for the Environmental Protection Agency to work with industry to mitigate  emissions of two climate super -pollutants: hydrofluorocarbons and methane.   
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act makes a big down payment on building a cleaner industrial sector, reinvigorating American manufacturing, and cutting climate super -pollutants from key industrial 
sources. Highlights include:  
• $5.8 billion for t he new Advanced Industrial Facilities Deployment Program.  The 
law launched a new program at the Department of Energy, the Advanced Industrial Facilities Deployment Program, to provide financial support to industrial facilities in emissions -intensive sector s, such as  the iron, steel, aluminum,  cement, glass, paper, and 
chemicals sectors, to complete  demonstration and deployment projects that reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions through installation or implementation of advanced industrial technologies. This program complements the $500 million provided to the Department of Energy in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law for 
Industrial Emissions Demonstration 
Projects  that test and validate technologies that reduce industrial emissions.   
• Expansion of the Advanced Energy Project Credit to include industrial emissions 
reduction.  The Inflation Reduction Act expands the 48C Advanced Energy Project 
Credit to include projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 percent at 
an industrial or manufac turing facility by installing low -carbon heat systems, carbon 
capture systems, energy efficiency  measures, and other pollution reduction technologies 
and practices. (This program is described in more detail earlier in the guidebook on page 
27).  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  68 • Extension and expansion of the 45Q tax credit for carbon capture, utilization, and 
sequestration  (CCUS) . The law extends the existing 45Q tax credit, adds an enhanced 
credit for direct air capture (DAC) , and lowers the carbon capture threshold requirements 
for certain facilities to benefit from the credit. Facilities meeting prevailing wage and registered  apprenticeship requirements can qualify for bonus credits. This tax credit 
complements funding in the Bipartisan Infrastructure law for CCUS and DAC , including 
$2.537 billion for the Carbon Capture Demonstration Projects Program
, $937 million for 
Carbon Capture Large- Scale Pilot Programs , and $3.5 billion for Regional Clean Direct 
Air Capture Hubs . 
• $1.55 billion to cut methane pollution from oil and gas industry operations. EPA received $1.55 billion to provide financial and technical assistance to accelerate the reduction of methane and other greenhouse gas emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems by improving and deploying new equipment, supporting technological innovation, permanently shutting in and plugging wells, and other activities . In addition 
to these financial incentives, the Inflation Reduction Act imposes a waste emissions charge on facilit ies with methane emissions that exceed a certain threshold. This EPA 
program complements
 near ly $4.7 billion in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to plug and 
remediate orphaned oil and gas wells on Tribal, federal, state, and private lands.  
• $38.5 million to implement the American Innovation and Manufacturing (AIM) Act , 
a bipartisan law to phase down the production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), maximize reclamation and minimize releases from equipment, and facilitate the transition to next-generation technologies through sector- based restrictions.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13104  45Q Credit for Carbon Oxide Sequestration   
Department of Energy  50161  - Advanced Industrial Facilities 
Deployment Program  $5,812,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60113  - Methane Emissions Reduction Program  $1,550,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60109  - Implementation of the AIM  Act $38,500,000  
 
The Credit for Carbon Oxide Sequestration  (45Q) is eligible for direct pay. Section 13801 
of the Inflation Reduction Act, adding Section 6417 of the Internal Revenue Code, extend s many 
of the law ’s tax  incentives, including the 45Q credit, to entities that generally do not benefit from 
income tax credits, such as state, local, and Tribal governments and other tax -exempt entities. 
Specifically, these entities can elect to receive these tax credits in the form of direct payments. 
Certain businesses also can elect to receive the 45Q tax credit s in the form of direct payment s. 
The 45Q tax credit also is transferable. S ection 13801 adds Section 6418 of the Internal 
Revenue Code and makes certain tax credits transferable. T axpayers that are generally ineligible 
for direct payment of credits may transfer all or a portion of certain credits to an unrelated party 
in exchange for cash. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  69 Credit for Carbon Oxide Sequestration  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13104 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45Q  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a credit for carbon dioxide sequestration coupled with 
permitted end uses within the United States.  
Period of Availability:  Credit can be claimed for 12 years after a facility is placed in service. 
Facilities must be pla ced in service before 1/1/33. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit based on carbon capture and sequestration, injection for 
enhanced oil recovery (EOR), or utilization 
New or Modified Provision: Extended and modified, tying the credit amounts to meeting 
prevailing wage and registered  apprenticeship requirements, providing an enhanced credit for 
direct air capture (DAC), and lowering the carbon capture threshold requirements at facilities. 
Eligible Recipients: U.S. f acilities within minimum volumes: 1,000 metric tons of CO2 per year 
for DAC facilities; 18,750 metric tons for electricity generating facilities (with carbon capture 
capacity of 75% of baseline CO2 production); 12,500 metric tons for other facilit ies. 
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Am ount: $17/metric ton of carbon dioxide captured and sequestered; $12/metric 
ton for carbon dioxide that is injected for enhanced oil recovery or utilized. Those amounts are $36 and $26, respectively, for direct air capture facilities. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  5 times the base amounts if the facility meets prevailing wage and  
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations, states, political subdivisions, the 
Tennessee Valley Authority, Indian T ribal governments, Alaska Native Cor porations, and rural 
electricity co -ops (applicable entities). Entities other than applicable entities are eligible for up to 
5 years of direct pay (which is less than the full credit period and expires at the end of 2032) if 
they make an election. Applies to carbon capture equipment (CCE) that is originally placed in service after December 31, 2022. Applies separately with respect to CCE placed in service during a taxable year.  
Transferability: Yes  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  70 Stackability: Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 45(b)(3). 
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on the Credit for Carbon Oxide 
Sequestration  (11/3/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  71 Advanced Industrial Facilities Deployment Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains, Office of Clean Energy 
Demonstrations  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50161 
Program Description:  To provide competitive financial support to owners and operators of 
facilities engaged in energy intensive industrial processes to complete  demonstration and 
deployment projects that reduce a facility ’s greenhouse gas emissions through installation or 
implemen tation of advanced industrial technologies and early-stage engineering studies to 
prepare a facility to install or implement advanced industrial technologies.  
Funding Amount:  $5,812,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Rebates, and/or Cooperative Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Owners or operators of domestic, nonfederal, nonpower industrial or 
manufacturing facilities engaged in energy-intensive industrial processes. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To carry out projects for 1) purchase and installation or implementation of 
advanced industrial technologies at eligible facilities; 2) retrofits, upgrades, or operational 
improvements at eligible facilities to install or implement advanced industrial technologies; or 3) engineering studies and other work needed to prepare eligible facilities for activities described in (1) or (2).  
Cost Share Requirements:  At least 50%  
Formu la Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  72 Methane Emissions Reduction Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60113 
Program Description:  To provide financial and technical assistance to accelerate the reduction 
of methane and other greenhouse gas emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems. The 
statute also establishes a waste emissions charge for applicable facilities that report more than 25,000 metric tons of CO
2 equivalent per year (to the petroleum and natural gas systems source 
category of the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program) and that exceed statutorily specified waste emissions thre sholds. 
Funding Amount:  $1,550,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2028 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, rebates, contracts , and other activities  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  States, Counties, Cities/Townships, Special Districts, Territories, Tribal 
Governments (federally recognized), Tribal Governments (other than federally recognized), Public Higher Education Institutions, Private Higher Education Institutions, Nonprofits with 501(c)(3) status, Nonprofits without 501(c)(3) Status, Small Businesses, Businesses (other than small businesses), and Individuals 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To provide funding for financial and technical assistance for preparing and 
submitting greenhouse gas reports, monitoring methane emissions, and reducing methane and 
other greenhouse gas emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems, including improving and deploying equipment to reduce emissions, supporting innovation, permanently shutting in and plugging wells, mitigating health effects in low-income and disadvantaged communities, improving climate resiliency, and supporting environmental restoration. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  73 Implementation of the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency  
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60109 
Program Description:  To fund EPA’s implementation of the American Innovation and 
Manufacturing (AIM) Act, a bipartisan law to phase down the production and consumption of 
listed hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), maximize reclamation and minimize releases from 
equipment, and facilitate the transition to next-generation technologies through sector- based 
restrictions.  
Funding Amount:  $38,500,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants and direct federal spending  
New or Existing Program:  New (grant program) and Existing (direct federal spending) 
Eligible Recipients:  For the grant program only: States, Counties, Cities/Townships, Public 
Higher Education Institutions, Private Higher Education Institutions, Nonprofits with 501(c)(3) status, Nonprofits without 501(c)(3) status, Small Businesses, Businesses (other than small businesses), and Individuals 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses: (1) Provide funding for EPA for AIM Act implementation to carry out 
subsections (a) through (i) and subsection (k) of the statute ; (2) To deploy new implementation 
and compliance tools to carry out subsections (a) through (i) and subsection (k) of the statute ; (3) 
For competitive grants for reclaim and innovative destruction technologies under subsections (a) through (i) and subsection (k) of the statute . 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  74 Investing in Clean Hydrogen 
 
Clean hydrogen is a major component of President Biden’s plan to decarbonize the industrial 
sector.  In June 2021, the Department of Energy launched the Hydrogen Shot , an effort to 
accelerate breakthroughs in hydrogen technology and cut the cost of clean hydrogen by 80 percent to $1 per kilogram in one decade. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law included $9.5 billion for clean hydrogen initiatives, including $8 billion for 
Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs  
that will create jobs , markets, and infrastructure to expand use of clean hydrogen in the industrial 
sector and beyond; $1 billion for a Clean Hydrogen Electrolysis Program  to reduce the cost of 
hydrogen produced from clean electricity; and $500 million for Clean Hydrogen Manufacturing 
and Recycling Initiatives  to support equipment manufacturing and strong domestic supply chains 
for clean hydrogen.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act creates a new  Hydrogen Production Tax Credit to incentivize the 
domestic production of clean hydrogen, which w ill make this emerging low-carbon fuel source 
more  cost-competitive  and help the country meet the ambitious goals of the Hydrogen Shot.  
The Hydrogen Production Tax Credit (45V) is eligible for direct pay. Section 13801 of the 
Inflation Reduction Act, adding Section 6417 of the Internal Revenue Code, extend s many of the 
law’s tax  incentives , including the 45V credit, to entities that generally do not benefit from 
income tax credits, such as state, local, and Tribal governments  and other tax -exempt entities. 
Specifically, these entities can elect to receive these tax credits in the form of direct payments. 
Certain businesses also can elect to receive the 45V tax credit s in the form of direct payments. 
The 45V tax credit als o is transferable. S ection 13801 adds Section 6418 of the Internal 
Revenue Code and makes certain tax credits transferable. T axpayers that are generally ineligible 
for direct payment of credits may transfer all or a portion of certain credits to an unrelat ed party 
in exchange for cash. 
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  
Department of the Treasury  13204  45V Clean Hydrogen Production Tax Credit  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  75  
Clean Hydrogen Production Tax Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13204 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45V  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for the production of clean hydrogen at a 
qualified clean hydrogen production facility.  
Period of Availability:  Credit is for hydrogen produced after 12/31/22. Credit is available for 
facilities placed in service before 1/1/33 for their first 10 years in service. 
Tax Mechanism:  Production tax credit 
New or Modified Provision: New. T he existing excise tax credit for liquified hydrogen 
terminates after 12/31/22. Eligible Recipients: Producers of hydrogen in the United States. Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: $0.60/kg multiplied by the applicable percentage. The applicable 
percentage ranges from 20% to 100% depending on lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions. The $0.60/kg is adjusted for inflation. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  5 times the base credit if the facility meets prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: Yes, for tax -exempt organizations, states, political subdivisions, the 
Tennessee Valley Authority, Indian Tribal governments, Alaska Native Corporations, and rural 
electricity co -ops (applicable entities). Applies to facilities placed in service after December 31, 
2012. Applies separately with regard to each facility. Entities other than applicable entities are eligible for up to 5 years of direct pay, which is less than the full credit period and expires at the end of 2032, if they make an election. 
Transferability: Yes  
Stackability: Taxpayers can make an irrevocable election to choose the ITC in lieu of the 45V 
credit as long as they have not claimed the 45Q credit for carbon sequestration. Credit reduced for tax -exempt bonds with similar rules as section 4 5. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  76 Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Credits for Clean Hydrogen and Clean 
Fuel Production (11/3/2022)  
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  77  
Inve sting in Science and the Department of Energy ’s 
Core Research Mission  
 
The climate crisis calls for a new moonshot. To achieve President Biden’s goal of reaching net-zero emissions by no later than 2050, the United States needs to develop, demonstrate, and deploy the technologies that are available today while continuing transformative scientific and technological research that could lead to game -changing breakthroughs . At the 
Leaders Summit 
on Climate  on Earth Day 2021, President Biden charged the Department of Energy with 
speeding the development of critical clean energy and carbon pollution reduction technologies. In response, the Department of Energy launched the 
Energy Earthshots  initiative to accelerate 
technological breakthroughs and transform key energy technologies over the next decade—lowering costs, raising performance, creating new jobs, and helping to achieve the President’ s 
ambitious climate goal to achieve net zero emissions economywide no later than 2050. 
The Inflation Reduction Act invests in the Department of Energy’ s core research mission and 
world -class laboratories to continue to build the scientific foundation for rapid decarbonization. 
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act provides $2 billion to the Department of Energy’s  Office of Science 
and national laboratories.  
• $1.55 billion to the Department of Energy’ s Office o f Science to support national 
laboratory infrastructure improvements . On November 4, 2022, the Department of 
Energy announced  how it will allocate this funding to  upgrade scientific facilities, 
modernize infrastructure, and address deferred maintenance projects at the Department of Energy’s national laboratories. This funding—one of the largest ever investments in national laboratory infrastructure —will advance solutions-driven research and innovation 
conducted by America’ s best scientists to tackle the nation ’s greatest challenges and put 
America in position to achieve the President ’s ambitious climate goals.  
 
• $450 million to support infrastructure improvements at three key national laboratories:  the National Energy Technology Laboratory, Idaho National Laboratory, 
and National Renewable Energy Laboratory.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Energy  50172(a)  National Laboratory Infrastructure - Office of Science  $1,550,000,000  
Department of Energy  50172(b)  National Laboratory Infrastructure - Office of Fossil 
Energy and Carbon Management  $150,000,000  
Department of Energy  50172(c)  Idaho National Laboratory Infrastructure Investments  $150,000,000  
Department of Energy  50172(d)  National Laboratory Infrastructure - Office of Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy  $150,000,000  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  78  
National Laboratory Infrastructure - Office of Science  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Science  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50172(a) 
Program Description:  To support science laboratory infrastructure improvements and projects 
across seven Office of Science programs.  
Funding Amount:  $1,550,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2027. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing funding for existing infrastructure improvements and projects at 
laboratories and universities. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding: No  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
Relevant Announcements :  Biden -Harris Administration Announces $1.5 Billion From 
Inflation Reduction Act to Strengthen America’ s National 
Laboratories  ( 11/4/2022)  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  79   
National Laboratory Infrastructure -  
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50172(b) 
Program Description:  To support infrastructure improvements at the three complexes at the 
National Energy Technology Laboratory. 
Funding Amount:  $150,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2027. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing funding for infrastructure improvements at the National Energy 
Technology Laboratory. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  80 Idaho National Laboratory Infrastructure Investments  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Nuclear Energy  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50172(c) 
Program Description:  To support infrastructure improvements at the two complexes at the 
Idaho National Laboratory (INL) . On October 25, 2022, the Department of Energy announced  
that this  funding will support nearly a dozen projects at INL’ s Advanced Test Reactor and 
Materials Fuels Complex, both of which have been operational for more than 50 years and serve 
an instrumental role in advancing nuclear technologies for federal agencies, industry, and international partnerships. 
Funding Amount:  $150,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2027. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing funding for infrastructure improvements at the Idaho National 
Laboratory. 
Cost Share Requirements: N/A  
Formula Funding: No  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listin g: N/A 
Relevant Announcements : Biden -Harris Administration Announces $150 Million To Improve 
Nuclear Research and Development Infrastructure at Idaho 
National Laboratory (10/25/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  81 National Laboratory Infrastructure - Office of Energy  
Efficiency and Renewable Energy  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50172(d) 
Program Description:  To support infrastructure improvements at three campuses at the 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Funding Amount: $150,000,000 Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2027. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program: New  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing funding for infrastructure improvements at the National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
82 Protecting Communities from Harmful 
Air Pollution  
 
Levels of harmful air pollution have fallen steadily  across the United States over the last 50 
years —thanks to the Clean Air Act—while the U.S. economy has continued to grow. Some 
communities, however, continue to face exposure to unhealthy levels of pollution, including 
toxic pollution from legacy sources that have burdened communities for decades. As described in the previous sections, the Inflation Reduction Act invests billions to quickly deploy advanced energy technologies that will reduce pollution from the electricity, transportation, and industrial sectors. The  law also provides billions of dollars to Tribes, states, local governments, community 
organizations, and others to cut greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful air pollutants from targeted local sources, particularly in areas with environmental justice concerns.  
Cutting Air Pollution that Harms Public Health and the Climate  
 The In flation Reduction Act empowers communities to tackle their unique environmental 
challenges and pollution burdens. In addition to the historic investments to deploy clean  energy , 
clean vehicles, clean buildings, and clean manufacturing, the law also adds a powerful 
complement to these technology-focused programs: billions of dollars for grants to Tribes, states, local governments, community organizations, and others to cut greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful air pollutants that impose a disproportionate burden on underserved and vulnerable communities. These programs have a particular benefit for communities that experience and endure pollution from multiple stationary and mobile sources.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act creates several n ew programs to help Tribes, states, municipalities, 
community -based organizations, and the private sector to cut air pollution, including greenhouse 
gases, with a particular focus on the communities that carry a disproportionate pollution burden. All of th ese funds will advance the President ’s Justice40 Initiative. Highlights include:   
• $3 billion for Environmental and Climate Justice Block Grants. The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) new O ffice of Environmental Justice and External Civil 
Rights will provide grants and technical assistance to community-based organizations, alone or in partnerships, to reduce indoor and outdoor air pollution, including greenhouse gases; monitor for pollution; improve community resilience to the impacts of climate change, including extreme heat and wildfire; and build the capacity of these organizations to engage with state and federal decision -making processes.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  83 • $5 billion for Climate Pollution Reduction Grants.  EPA received $5 billion to provide 
grants to Tribes, states, air pollution control agencies, and  local governments to develop 
and implement plans for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
• $4 billion to reduce harmful air pollution from the transportation sector.  EPA 
received $1 billion for a Clean Heavy -Duty Vehicle Program for grants to Tribes, state 
and local governments, and other entities to offset the costs of replacing heavy-duty Class 
6 and 7 commercial vehicles with zero -emission vehicles  and deploying related  
infrastructure . EPA received an addit ional $3 billion to provide grants to port authorities; 
Tribal, state, and local government entities ; and other eligible entities  to reduce harmful 
air pollution at ports by purchasing and installing zero-emission port equipment and technology. 
• More than $ 3.2 billion for the Neighborhood Access and Equity Grant Program . 
This Department of Transportation grant program will support projects to improve walkability, safety, and affordable transportation access in communities ; to clean up 
existing and prevent new environmental harms caused by transportation projects in disadvantaged communities; and provide planning and capacity building support to disadvantaged and underserved communities. This program complements the Department of Transportation’ s Reconnecting Communities Pilot Program
, created and funded by the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to restore community connectivity by removing, retrofitting, or mitigating highways or other t ransportation facilities that create barriers to 
community cohesion. 
• $1.55 billion to cut methane pollution from oil and gas industry operations. EPA received $1.55 billion to provide financial and technical assistance to accelerate the reduction of methane and other greenhouse gas emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems. Cutting methane pollution has the co-benefit of reducing emissions of smog-forming volatile organic compounds. The Inflation Reduction Act also imposes a waste emissions charge on facilities with methane emissions that exceed a certain threshold. (This program is described in more detail earlier in the guidebook on page 71
). 
 
See the table on the next page for a full list of the programs summarized in this chapter.    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  84 Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60201  Environmental and Climate Justice Block 
Grants  $3,000,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60114  Climate Pollution Reduction Grants  $5,000,000,000  
Department of 
Transportation  60501  Neighborhood Access and Equity Grant 
Program  $3,205,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60101  Clean Heavy -Duty Vehicles  $1,000,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60102  Grants to Reduce Air Pollution at Ports  $3,000,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60104  Diesel Emissions Reductions  $60,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60106  Funding to Address Air Pollution at Schools  $50,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60105(d)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Emissions 
from Wood Heaters  $15,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60105(f)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Clean Air 
Act Grants  $25,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60105(g)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Mobile 
Source Grants  $5,000,000  
Environmental Protection 
Agency  60107  Low Emissions Electricity Program  $87,000,000  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  85  
Advancing Equity and Environmental Justice by Cutting Localized and 
Legacy Pollution  
The full promise of the Inflation Reduction Act will only be realized if Tribes, low- income 
communities, rural areas, communities with environmental justice concerns, ener gy 
communities, and other underserved parts of the United States benefit from the law’ s historic 
investments.  
Several provisions are designed to direct dollars to these areas. The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) received $3 billion for a new Environmental and Climate Justice Block Grant 
Program, which will allow the agency to provide more funding to communities than ever before. 
The Inflation Reduction Act ensures that community-based organizations will be the primary 
beneficiaries of this historic f unding, as Tribal and local governments and academic institutions 
are only eligible for funding if they partner with a community organization.   
Knowledge is power, and the Inflation Reduction Act includes several programs to expand and 
improve pollution monitoring. Among other eligible activities, EPA’s Environmental and 
Climate Justice Block Grant Program will support community -led projects to monitor and clean 
up legacy pollution. EPA also received $117 million for community air pollution monitoring at 
or near the fenceline of industrial facilities; $50 million to help state, local, and Tribal air 
agencies to add new monitoring sites in communities and replace aging equipment at existing 
sites; and $3 million to make special air quality sensors available to low- income and 
disadvantaged communities.   
The Inflation Reduction Act targets air pollution from the transportation sector, which can have a 
disproportionate impact  on low-income communities and communities of color living along 
heavily traveled roadways and near busy ports . EPA received $4 billion for two grant programs 
to replace heavy -duty trucks and port equipment with cleaner, zero- emission alternatives. In 
addition, poorly designed or sited transportation projects can harm communities by increasing 
dangerous traffic for pedestrians, limiting access to economic opportunities, or even dividing 
communities. The Federal Highway Administration  received more than $3.2 billion for the 
Neighborhood Access and Equity Grant Program, which will support work to mitigate the 
negative impacts of transportation projects and to improve walkability, safety, and accessibility. 
More than $1.2 billion is dedicated to projects in economically disadvantaged communities. 
 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  86 Environmental an d Climate Justice Block Grants  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60201 
Program Description:  To provide grants and technical assistance to community -based 
organizations, alone or in partnerships, to reduce indoor and outdoor air pollution, including 
greenhouse gases; monitor for pollution; improve community resilience to the impacts of climate change, including extreme heat and wildfire; and build the capacity of these organizations to engage with state and federal decision -making processes.  
Funding Amount:  $3,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Primarily competitive grants, with potentially a limited number of 
noncompetitive grants and contract support. 
New or Existing Program:  New and Existing 
Eligible Recipients:  (1) A community-based nonprofit organization; (2) A partnership of 
community -based nonprofit organizations; or (3) A partnership between a community- based 
nonprofit organization and an Indian Tribe, local government, or an institution of higher 
education. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  (1) Community-led air and other pollution monitoring, prevention, and 
remediation, and investments in low- and zero -emission and resilient technologies and related 
infrastructure and workforce development that help reduce greenhouse gas emissions and other 
air pollutants; (2) Mitigating climate and health risks from urban heat islands, extreme heat, wood heater emissions, and wildfire events; (3) Climate resiliency and adaptation; (4) Reducing indoor toxics and indoor air pollution; or (5) Facilitating engagement of disadvantaged communities in state and federal advi sory groups, workshops, rulemakings, and other public 
processes  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.614; others still to be developed; some existing ones will be 
revised .  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  87 Climate Pollution Reduction Grants 
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60114 
Program Description:  To provide grants to Tribes, states, air pollution control agencies, and 
local governments to develop and implement plans for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
Funding Amount:  $5,000,000,000. Includes $250,000,000 for planning grants and  
$4,750,000,000 for implementation grants. Period of Availability:  Planning grant funds to remain available until September 30, 2031. EPA 
must publish the planning grant funding availability by May 13, 2023 (270 days after 
enactment). Implementation grant funds to remain available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  
For planning grants:  States, T erritories, District of Columbia; air pollution control 
agencies ; municipalities ; Tribes ; or groups of such eligible entities . 
For implementation grants:  Those states, territories, District of Columbia; air pollution 
control agencies; municipalities; Tribes; or groups of such eligible entities that are 
covered by a plan developed with funding from a planning grant awarded under this section . 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To develop and implement plans for reducing greenhouse gas air pollution. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  88 Neighborhood Access and Equity Grant Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Transportation  
Bureau or Office: Federal Highway Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60501 
Program Description:  To award competitive grants for context- sensitive projects that improve 
walkability  and safety and provide affordable transportation access; to mitigate or remediate 
negative impacts  on the human or natural environment in disadvantaged communities from a 
surface tr ansportation facility; and for planning and capacity building activities in disadvantaged 
or underserved communities. 
Funding Amount:  $3,205,000,000 
Period of Availability:  Available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive Grant Program  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  (1) A state, unit of local government, political subdivision of a state, MPO, 
or U.S. territory; (2) Federally recognized Indian Tribe; (3) A special purpose district or public 
authority with a tran sportation function; or (4) A non-profit organization or institution of higher 
education that partners with an eligible entity described above to compete for grants for planning and capacity building activities in disadvantaged or underserved communities. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Grants to implement context- sensitive projects that improve walkability  and 
safety and provide affordable transportation access; mitigate or remediate negative impacts on 
the human or natural environment from a surface transportation facility in a disadvantaged or underserved community; and to implement planning and capacity building activities in disadvantaged or underserved communities. Other eligible activities include the provision of guidance, technical assistance, templates, training, or tools to facilitate efficient and effective contracting, design, and project delivery by units of local government; and subgrants to units of local governments to build capacity to assume responsibilities to deliver surface transportation projects. Funds cannot be used to add capacity for single- occupant passenger vehicles.  Of the 
$3.205 billion appropriated, $1.262 billion is reserved for economically disadvantaged communities, and $50 million is reserved for technical assistance. 
Cost Share Requirements:  The federal share shall not be more than 80%, unless the project is 
in a disadvantaged community. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  89 Clean Heavy -Duty Ve hicle s 
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60101 
Program Description:  To provide funding to offset the costs of replacing heavy-duty Class 6 
and 7 commercial vehicles with zero -emission vehicles; deploying infrastructure needed to 
charge, fuel, or maintain these zero -emission vehicles; and developing and training the necessa ry 
workforce. 
Funding Amount:  $1,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031.  
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants and rebates  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  (1) a state; (2) a municipality; (3) an Indian Tribe; (4) a nonprofit school 
transportation association . The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to mean a s tate, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa 
and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Program covers up to 100 percent of costs for (1) incremental cost of replacing an 
existing heavy -duty vehicle with a zero -emission vehicle ; (2) purchasing and operating 
associated infrastructure; (3) workforce development and training; (4) planning and technical activities . 
Cost Share Requirements:  TBD  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  90 Grants to Reduce Air Pollution at Ports  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60102 
Program Description:  To purchase and install zero -emission port equipment and technology, 
conduct associated planning or permitting activities for this equipment and technology, and 
develop climate action plans to further address air pollution at ports. 
Funding Amount:  $3,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available throu gh September 30, 2027. 
Funding Mechanism:  Rebates and competitive grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients : (1) A port authority; (2) A state, regional, local, or Tribal agency that has 
jurisdiction over a port authority or a port; (3) An air pollution control agency; or (4) A private 
entity (including a nonprofit organization) that applies for a grant in partnership with an entity described in (1)-(3) and owns, operates, or uses the facilities, cargo-handling equipment, transportation equipment, or related technology of a port. The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to 
mean a s tate, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
Guam, and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  (1) To purchase or install zero-emission port equipment or technology for use at, 
or to directly serve, one or more ports; (2) To conduct any relevant planning or permitting in 
connection with the purchase or installation of such zero-emission port equipment or technology; and (3) To develop qualified climate action plans. 
Cost Share Requirements : No 
Formula Funding : No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  91 Diesel Emissions Reductions  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60104 
Program Description:  To identify and reduce diesel emissions resulting from goods movement 
facilities and vehicles servicing goods movement facilities in low -income and disadvantaged 
communities to address the health impacts of such emissions on such communities. 
Funding Amount:  $60,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until Septe mber 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, rebates , and loans 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  (A) a regional, state, local, or Tribal agency or port authority with 
jurisdiction over transportation or air quality; (B) a nonprofit organization or institution that (i) 
represents or provides pollution reduction or educational services to persons or organizations that own or operate diesel fleets; or (ii) has, as its principal purpose, the promotion of transportation or air q uality; and (C) any private individual or entity that (i) is the owner of record of a diesel 
vehicle or fleet operated pursuant to a contract, license, or lease with a Federal department or agency or an entity described in (A); and (ii) meets such timely and appropriate requirements as the Administrator may establish for vehicle use and for notice to and approval by the Federal department or agency or entity described in (A) with respect to which the owner has entered into a contract, license, or lease as d escribed in (C)(i).  The Clean Air Act defines “ state” to mean a 
state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility : Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To identify and reduce diesel emissions resulting from goods movement facilities 
and vehicles servicing goods movement facilities in low-income and disadvantaged communities 
to address the health impacts of such emissions on such communities.  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.039  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  92 Funding to Address Air Pollution at Schools  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60106 
Program Description:  To provide funding for grants and other activities to monitor and reduce 
pollution and greenhouse gas emissions at schools in low-income and disadvantaged 
communities. To provide technical assistance to schools in low-income and disadvantaged communities to develop school air and environmental quality plans and to identify and mitigate ongoing air pollution hazards. 
Funding Amount:  $50,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants  and technical assistance  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  State, local, Tribal agencies, not for profit organizations and others for 
projects supporting schools in low-income and disadvantaged communities. The Clean Air Act 
defines  “state” to mean a s tate, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  (1) To address environmental issues affecting air quality in schools ; (2) To 
develop school air and environmental quality plans that include standards for school building, 
design, construction, or renovation; (3) To identify and mitigate ongoing air pollution hazards in schools ; (4) To provide technical assistance addressing air quality to schools in low-income and 
disadvantaged communities. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  93 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Emissions from Wood Heaters  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency  
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(d) 
Program Description:  To fund testing and other agency activities to address particulate 
emissions from residential wood heaters, which can cause significant localized concentrations of 
fine particle pollution.  
Funding Amount:  $15,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031.  
Funding Mechanism:  Grants and other activities . Note: Activities to mitigate emissions from 
wood heaters also are eligible under sections 60201 and 60114. 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  TBD  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To complete the ongoing wood heater test method development; to continue 
research on emissions from residential wood combustion to better understand key elements 
including fuel species, wet fuel impacts, emissions of air toxics and other criteria pollutants, and emission factors and control options; to provide grants to state, local, and T ribal air agencies to 
better understand how this sector impacts their airsheds and how they may choose to manage those emissions including certified model re -testing; to support enhancement and improvement 
of EPA ’s certifi cation process.  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  94 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Clean Air Act Grants  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(f) 
Program Description:  To provide general funding for EPA’ s Clean Air Act research, 
development, planning, and grants program. 
Funding Amount:  $25,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Air pollution control agencies as defined by the Clean Air Act, which 
includes states , local governments, and Tribal agencies responsible for the control of air 
pollution. The Clean Air Act defines “state” to mean a state, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  For EPA ’s Clean Air Act research, development, and grants program. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  95 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Mobile Source Grants  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60105(g) 
Program Description: To provide grants to s tates to adopt and implement California ’s 
greenhouse gas and zero -emission standards for on -road mobile sources. 
Funding Amount:  $5,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: States  and others TBD. The Clean Air Act defines “state” to mean a state, 
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and 
American Samoa and in cludes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  TBD  
Eligible Uses:  To provide grants to states covered by section 177 of the Clean Air Act to adopt 
and implement California ’s greenhouse gas and zero-emission standards for on-road mobile 
sources.  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  96 Low Emissions Electricity Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60107 
Program Description:  To fund a wide range of activities to encourage low emissions electricity 
generation  and use through education, technical assistance, and partnerships with consumers, low 
income and disadvantaged communities, industry, and state, local, and Tribal governments. To 
do an assessment of anticipated greenhouse gas reductions from changes in domestic e lectricity 
generation and use and to ensure that reductions in greenhouse gases are achieved through the existing authorities of the Clean Air Act.  
Funding Amount:  $87,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  N/A 
Eligible Uses:  Provide funding to EPA to do a variety of activities related to reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation and use, including (1) for consumer- related 
education and partnerships; (2) for education, technical assistance, and partnerships within low-income and disadvantaged communities; (3) for industry- related outreach, technical assistance, 
and partnerships; (4) for outreach and technical assistance to, and partnerships with, s tate, Tribal, 
and local governments; (5) to assess the reductions in greenhouse gas emissions that result from changes in domestic electricity generation and us e that are anticipated to occur on an annual 
basis through fiscal year 2031; (6) to ensure that reductions in greenhouse gas emissions are achieved through use of the existing authorities of the Clean Air Act, incorporating the assessment described in (5) . 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  97 Improving Pollution Monitoring and Tracking  
 
Monitoring for pollution is critical for protecting communities fro m dangerous health impacts. It 
supports enforcement of environmental laws and helps c ommunities  to understand how they are 
affected by pollution, pinpoint a localized pollution source, and  document the severity of a 
problem. The Inflation Reduction Act includes several programs to help communities and state, 
local, and Tribal air agencies add new pollution monitors, including at the fenceline of industrial facilities. In addition, the law gives the White House Council on Environmental Quality new resources to enhance the availability of national level data sets that can help characterize the disproportionate impacts of pollution, climate change, and other socioeconomic burdens on communities; provide a pathway to quantify and address the cumulative burdens on communities ; and identify ways to improve outcomes for communities with environmental 
justice concerns.  Funding for air pollution monitoring will advance the President’s Justice40 
Initiative.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Environmental Protection Agency  60105(a)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Fenceline 
Air Monitoring  $117,500,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60105(b)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: 
Multipollutant Monitoring  $50,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60105(c)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Air Quality 
Sensors in Low -Income and Disadvantaged 
Communities  $3,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60105(e)  Funding to Address Air Pollution: Methane 
Monitoring  $20,000,000  
Council on Environmental Quality 60401  Environmental and Climate Data Improvement  $32,500,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60110  Funding for Enforcement Technology and 
Public Information  $25,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60111  Greenhouse Gas Corporate Reporting  $5,000,000  
 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  98 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Fenceline Air Monitoring  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(a) 
Program Description:  EPA ’s National Air Monitoring Program will use this funding to enhance 
and extend community air monitoring at or near the fenceline by developing and refining air 
toxics monitoring methods including appropriate fenceline monitoring approaches; building and enhancing capacity to conduct short term monitoring for local pollutant concerns; and expanding the nation’ s criteria and air toxics monitoring capabilities.  
Funding Amount:  $117,500,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants and other activities  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  State/local/T ribal air agencies and other public or private nonprofit 
institutions or organizations. The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to mean a s tate, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To deploy, support, and maintain community and state, local, and T ribal air 
agency monitoring at or near the fenceline; to improve fenceline and emerging air toxics monitoring methods; to enhance mobile monitoring capabilities to address local air toxics concerns especially in low -income and disadvantaged communities and on T ribal lands; to 
expand national air toxics trend stations and community monitoring efforts. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formu la Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
Relevant Announcements :  EPA Announces $53 Million for Community Air Pollution 
Monitoring Projects  (11/3/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  99 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Multipollutant Monitoring  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(b) 
Program Description:  EPA ’s National Air Monitoring Program will provide funding to sustain, 
enhance, modernize, and expand the nation’ s ambient air monitoring network, which will allow 
state, local , and T ribal air agencies to add new monitoring sites in communities; to replace aging 
equipment at existing sites; and to use the latest monitoring technology to improve measurement 
and delivery of information to the public. 
Funding Amount:  $50,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants and ot her activities  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  State/local/T ribal air agencies . The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to mean a 
state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
and American Samo a and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To expand the national ambient air quality monitoring network through 
establishment of new, additional multipollutant monitoring stations; to upgrade existing air quality monitoring sites via replacement, repair, operation, and maintenance of monitors and other equipment. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  100 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Air Quality Sensors  
in Low -Income and Disadvantaged Communities  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(c) 
Program Description:  EPA ’s National Air Monitoring Program will provide funding to make 
air quality sensor technology available to low-income and disadvantaged communities, helping 
them to inexpensively screen for certain air pollutants. 
Funding Amount:  $3,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants and other activities  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  State/local/Tribal air agencies and other public or private nonprofit 
institutions or organizations. The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to mean a s tate, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa 
and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To purchase, deploy, integrate, and operate air quality sensors in low-income and 
disadvantaged communities and on Tribal lands; to support the EPA Regional Sensor Loan 
program. 
Cost Share Requirements: No  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  101 Funding to Address Air Pollution: Methane Monitoring  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60105(e) 
Program Description: To provide funding to monitor methane emissions from significant 
sources not covered by other parts of the Inflation Reduction Act: flaring and fugitive sources. 
Funding Amount:  $20,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants and other activities  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  State/local/T ribal air agencies . The Clean Air Act defines  “state” to mean a 
state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
and American Samoa and includes the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To enhance and expand the method development of new technologies capable of 
real time flare measurement and monitoring; to develop methods to measure fugitive sources of 
methane (e.g., landfills); to provide grants to  state, local, and Tribal air agencies to develop 
methane monitoring capabilities to determine effectiveness of emission mitigation efforts.  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 66.034 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  102 Environmental and Climate Data Improvement  
 
 
Federal Agency: Council on Environmental Quality 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60401 
Program Description:  To improve the quality, availability, and use of data to support the 
federal government’s efforts to address environmental injustice and to better protect all 
communities from the impacts of pollution and climate change; to update and improve the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool to inform federal investments and decision-making; to enhance the availability of national level data sets that can hel p characterize the 
disproportionate impacts of pollution, climate change, and other socioeconomic burdens on communities and provide a pathway to quantify and address these cumulative burdens; and identify ways to improve outcomes for communities with envi ronmental justice concerns.  
Funding Amount:  $32,500,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  See program description. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
Relevant Announcements :  Biden -Harris Administration Launches Version 1.0 of Climate and 
Economic Justice Screening Tool, Key Step in Implementing 
President Biden ’s Justice40 Initiative  (11/22/2022) 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  103 Enforcement Technology and Public Information  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  60110 
Program Description:  To update the EPA Integrated Compliance Information System (ICIS) 
and any associated systems, infrastructure, or tools and to provide grants to states and state 
pollution control agencies to update their systems to communicate with ICIS. 
Funding Amount:  $25,000,000 
Period of Availability: To remain available until September 30, 2031. Funding Mechanism: Direct federal spending and competitive grants  
New or Existing Program:  New (grants) and Existing 
Eligible Recipients:  For the grant program only: States and state  pollution control agencies 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses: For the grant program: To update systems to ensure comm unication with the 
Integrated Compliance Information System of the Environmental Protection Agency and any 
associated systems.  
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  104 Greenhouse Gas Corporate Reporting  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Air and Radiation 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60111 
Program Description:  To provide funding for EPA to improve standardization and transparency 
of corporate climate action commitments and plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; to 
support corporate progress toward meeting such commitments and implementing such plans; and to enhance transparency regarding corporate progress. 
Funding Amount:  $5,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  N/A 
Eligible Uses:  Provide funding for EPA to support enhanced standardization and transparency of 
corporate climate action commitments and plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; (2) 
Support enhanced transparency regarding progress toward meeting such commitments and implementing such plans; (3) Support progress toward meeting such commitments and implementing such plans. 
Cost Share Requirements: N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
:  N/A
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
105 Making Homes and Buildings Cleaner 
and More Efficient to Save Consumers Money and Cut Pollution  
 
President Biden ’s economic plan focuses on lowering energy costs for American families so they 
can keep their homes warm in the winter and cool in the summer. Monthly energy bills can be a 
particular burden for families trying to make ends meet. The Inflation Reduction Act will help households afford energy efficient appliances and upgrades when they need to make home repairs, so they can save money on their energy bills for years to come. Modernizing and upgrading the nation’s residential and commercial buildings to be affordable, resilient, energy efficient, and electrified will create new domestic manufacturing opportunities for electric heating and cooling technology, create good-paying jobs in the building trades, and drive down greenhouse gas emissions from the building sector. 
Lowering Energy Costs for Households  
 The Inflation Reduction Act empowers and equips homeowners who want to make upgrades so they can save energy and reduce their energy costs. Families can save money on their monthly energy bills by choosing energy efficient appliances that use less electricity. They can fix 
inefficiencies, like drafty windows and poor insulation, that lead to energy waste. New tax credits  and deductions in the Inflation Reduction Act can reduce the cost of energy -efficient 
home upgrades, including heat pumps and other appliances, windows, doors, and more; offset  
the cost of adding residential clean energy sources, including solar panels and battery storage; and make constructing energy- efficient  single and multi- family homes  cheaper and easier . The 
law also includes nearly $9 billion for consumer home energy rebate programs to electrify home appliances and perform energy efficient retrofits , with a focus on low-income consumers.  
The programs in the Inflation Reduction Act build on investments in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law ’s $3.5 billion expansion of the 
Weatherization 
Assistance Program  to improve home energy eff i ciency for low -income families; $250 million 
for the Energy Efficiency Revolving Loan Fund Capitalization Grant Program , through which 
states can  provide loans and grants for energy efficiency audits, upgrades, and retrofits to 
buildings; and $550 million for the Energy Efficien cy and Conservation Block Grant Program , 
which is designed to assist states, local governments, and Tribes in implementing strategies to reduce energy use and  improve energy efficiency. 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  106 Funding Overview  
Highlights include:  
• Nearly $9 billion for states and Tribes for consumer home energy rebate programs,  
enabling communities to make homes more energy efficient, upgrade to electric 
appliances, and cut energy costs. The Department of Energy estimates  that these historic 
home energy efficiency and electrification consumer rebates, targeted to lower -income 
consumers, will save households up to $1 billion annually. 
• The Ene rgy Efficiency Home Improvement Credit provides up to $3,200 annually in 
tax credits to lower the cost of energy efficient upgrades by up to 30 percent,  
including the purchase of heat pumps, insulation, efficient doors and windows, electrical 
panel upgrades, and energy audits. Heat pumps alone can save households up to $500 in energy costs every year.  
• The Residential Clean Energy Credit provides a 30 percent tax credit to lower the 
installation cost of residential clean energy,  including rooftop solar, wind, geothermal, 
and battery storage. The credit steps down to 22 percent by 2034. The Residential Clean 
Energy Credit offers more households access to and freedom to choose renewable energy that can lower monthly energy bills and cut air pollution from power plants.  
• The New Energy Efficient Home Credit provides up to $5,000 in tax credits for each new energy -efficient home and up to $1,000 for each unit in a multi- family building.  
This credit  incentivizes builders to lower monthly energy costs for future owners and 
renters. Single and multi- family dwellings that meet Energy Star r equirements are 
eligible.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13301  25C Energy Efficien t Home Improvement Credit  - 
Department of the Treasury  13302  25D Residential Clean Energy Credit  - 
Department of the Treasury  13304  45L New Energy Efficient Homes Credit  - 
Department of Energy  50121  - Home Energy Performance-Based, Whole -House 
Rebates  $4,300,000,000  
Department of Energy  50122  - High -Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program  $4,500,000,000  
Department of Energy  50123  - State -Based Home Efficiency Contractor Training 
Grants  $200,000,000  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  107 Energy Efficiency Home Improvement Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13301 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 25C  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for energy-efficiency improvements of 
residential homes.  
Period of Availability:  2022-2032 
Tax Mechanism:  Consumer tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. Credit rate increased from 10% to 30%. Eligibility and standards are modified. $500/ per taxpayer lifetime limit eliminated and replaced 
with increased annual limits.  
Eligible Recipients: Homeowners ; renters for certain improvements  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 30% of cost, with limits for each type of improvement and total per year. Credit capped at $600 for “energy property,” e.g. efficient heating and cooling equipment; $600 for windows; $250 per door, $500 total for doors; $2,000 for heat pumps; $1,200 for qualified energy efficiency improvements to the building envelope, including insulation and air sealing. Total annual credit capped at $1,200, with a separate annual $2,000 limit for heat pumps. $150 credit for home energy audits. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  None 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: No rules  
Relevant Announcements:  
Request for Comments on Incentive Provisions for Improving the 
Energy Efficiency of Residential and Commercial Buildings  
(10/5/2022) 
 Frequently asked questions about energy efficient home 
improvements and residential clean energy property credits  
(12/22/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  108 Residential Clean Energy Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13302 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 25D  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit for the purchase of residential clean energy 
equipment, including battery storage with capacity of at least 3 kWh. 
Period of Availability:  2022-2032, with phasedown over 2033-2034. 
Tax Mechanism:  Consumer tax credit  
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. Credit extended at 30% through 2032, 
with phasedown through 2034. Battery storage newly eligible in 2023; biomass fuel property credit eliminated.  
Eligible Recipients: Homeowners  (including renters)  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: 30% of cost of equipment through 2032; 26% in 2033; 22% in 2034. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  None 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: No rules  
Relevant Announcements:  
Request for Comments on Incentive Provisions for Improving the 
Energy Efficiency of Residential and Commercial Buildings  
(10/5/2022) 
Frequently asked questions about energy efficient home 
improvements and residential clean energy property credits  
(12/22/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  109 New Energy Efficient Homes Credit  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13304 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 45L  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax credit f or construction of new energy efficient 
homes. Period of Availability:  2023-2032 
Tax Mechanism:  Tax credit for homebuilders 
New or Modified Provision: Existing, but the credit had previously expired at end of 2021. 
Retroactively extended with new rules effective for homes acquired after 2022.  
Eligible Recipients: Homebuilders  
Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: $2,500 for new homes meeting Energy Star standards; $5,000 for certified zero -energy ready homes. For multifamily, base amounts are $500 per unit for Energy 
Star and $1000 per unit for zero-energy ready. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  For multifamily homes, 5 times the base amount if prevailing wage 
requirements are met.  Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: Yes. Taxpayers claiming the Low -Income Housing Tax Credit do not have to 
reduce basis for 45L credits claimed. Relevant Announcements:   
Request for Comments on Incentive Provisions for Improving the 
Energy Efficiency of Residential and Commercial Buildings  
(10/5/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act   
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  110 Home Energy Performance -Based, Whole -House Rebates  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of State and Community Energy Programs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50121 
Program Description:  To award grants to state energy offices to develop a whole-house energy 
saving retrofits program that will provide rebates to homeowners and aggregators for whole-
house energy saving retrofits. 
Funding Amount:  $4,300,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  States  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  States may use up to 20% for planning, administration, or technical assis tance. 
The remaining funds will be utilized for eligible equipment that significantly reduces energy 
consumption in a home or multi-family building. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Yes. Cost share requirement dependent on income level. 
50% if AMI exceeds 80% AMI  
20% if AMI is below 80% AMI Formula Funding:  Yes 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
Relevant Announcements:  Biden -Harris Administration Announces State and Tribe 
Allocations f or Home Energy Rebate Program  (11/2/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  111 High -Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of State and Community Energy Programs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50122 
Program Description:  To award grants to state energy offices and Tribal entities to develop and 
implement a high -efficiency electric home rebate program.  
Funding Amount:  $4,500,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: States and Tribal entities. $225,000,000 is allocated for Tribes. 
Tribal Eligibilit y: Yes 
Eligible Uses:  A state energy office or Indian Tribe may use up to 20 percent of the grant 
amount for planning, administration, or technical assistance. The remaining funds are for rebates 
for the purchase of high- efficiency electric home appliances.  
Cost Share Requirements: Yes. Cost share requirement dependent on income level and price of the appliance.  
Formula Funding:  Yes 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
Relevant Announcements:  Biden -Harris Administration Announces State and Tribe 
Allocations f or Home Energy Rebate Program  (11/2/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  112 State- Based Home Efficiency Contractor Train ing Grants  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of State and Community Energy Programs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50123 
Program Description:  To provide financial assistance to states to develop and implement a 
program to provide training and education to contractors involved in the installation of home 
energy efficiency and electrification improvements, including improvements eligible for rebates under sections 50121(d) and 50122(d) of the Inflation Reduction Act. 
Funding Amount: $200,000,000 Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  States  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  State may use funding to (1) to reduce the cost of training contractor employees; 
(2) to provide testing and certification of contractors trained and educated under a state program; 
and (3) to partner with nonprofit organizations to develop and implement a state program. States’ administrative co sts may not exceed 10 percent. 
Cost Share Requirements: No  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  113 Supporting Investment in Energy -Efficient and Low -
Carbon Buildings  
 
Although they do not have smokestacks, buildings—including their construction, the ir powering 
and heating/cooling, and the manufacturing of building materials—are a large source of 
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States. In June 2022, President Biden announced  a 
National Initia tive to Advance Building Codes that will help state, local, Tribal, and territorial 
governments adopt the latest building codes and standards for energy efficiency and safety, which will create good -paying jobs, lower energy bills, and protect communities from extreme 
weather. On December 7, 2022, the Biden- Harris Administration 
announced  a Federal Building 
Performance Standard that direct s federal agencies to cut energy use and electrify equipment and 
appliances to achieve zero direct greenhouse gas emissions in 30 percent of the building space owned by the federal government by square footage by 2030. 
The Inflation Reduction Act supports these programs and pro vides tax incentives, grants, and 
loans to make commercial and residential buildings, including federally -assisted  housing, more 
energy efficient and resilient to the impacts of a warming climate. It complements investments in 
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, including $225 million for the Building Codes Implementation 
for Efficiency and Resilience Program  at the Department of Energy, to help states support 
sustained, cost-effective implementation of updated building energy codes. 
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act invests in programs to make buildings part of the climate solution. Highlights include:  
• $1 billion for the Green and Resilient Retrofi t Program at the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD), which will provide funding to the owners of HUD-
assisted multifamily properties for projects to improve energy or water efficiency; enhance indoor air quality or sustainability; implement the use of zero -emission 
electricity generation, low -emission building materials or processes, energy storage, or 
building electrification strategies; or make the properties more resilient to climate impacts.  HUD also will conduct energy and water benchmar king of HUD- assisted 
properties. 
• $1 billion for Department of Energy grants to state and local governments to adopt 
updated building energy codes,  including zero-energy codes. Homes that are 
zero-
energy ready  ar e so energy efficient that a renewable energy system could offset most or 
all the home ’s annual energy use. 
• Extension and expansion of the energy efficient commercial buildings deduction. 
Buildings that increase their energy efficiency by at least 25 percent will be able to claim this tax deduction, with bonuses for higher efficiency improvements. The claimant can earn additional bonus deductions by meeting prevailing wage and registered  
apprenticeship requirements.   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  114  
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Tax 
Code 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Treasury  13303  179D  Energy Efficient Commercial 
Buildings Deduction  - 
Dept of Housing and Urban 
Development  30002(a)(1)  - Green and Resilient Retrofit Program - 
Grants and Loans  $837,500,000  
Dept of Housing and Urban 
Development  30002(a)(3)  - Green and Resilient Retrofit Program - 
Contracts and Cooperative Agreements  $60,000,000  
Dept of Housing and Urban 
Development  30002(a)(4)  - Green and Resilient Retrofit Program - 
Benchmarking  $42,500,000  
Department of Energy  50131  - Assistance for Latest and Zero 
Building Energy Code Adoption  $1,000,000,000  
 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  115 Energy Efficient Commercial Buildings Deduction  
 
 
Federal A gency: Department of the Treasury  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 13303 
Tax Code Location: 26 U.S. Code § 179D  
Tax Provision Description: Provides a tax deduction for energy efficiency improvements to 
commercial buildings, such as improvements to interior lighting; heating, cooling, ventilation, and hot water; and building envelope. 
Period of Availability:  Permanent; new rules generally begin in 2023. 
Tax Mechanism:  Business tax deduction 
New or Modified Provision: Modified and extended. Efficiency requirements updated. Eligible Recipients: Owners and long- term lessees of commercial buildings. Designers of 
energy efficient building property ( architects, engineers) . Tax -exempt owners of commercial 
properties, pending Treasury guidance on deduction allocation. Tribal Eligibility : Yes  
Base Credit Amount: $0.50-$1 per square foot, depending on increase in efficiency, with 
deduction over four year periods capped at $1 per square foot. Inflation adjusted. Alternatively, taxpayers can deduct adjusted basis in “ qualified retrofit plans ” that reduce a building’s energy 
use intensity by at least 25%. 
Bonus Credit Amount:  5 times the base amount if the pr oject meets prevailing wage and 
registered  apprenticeship requirements. Initial guidance on the labor provisions is available here
. 
Direct Pay Eligibility: No 
Transferability: No  
Stackability: No rules  
Relevant Announcements:   Request for Comments on Incentive Provisions for Improving the 
Energy Efficiency of Residential and Commercial Buildings  
(10/5/2022) 
Prevailing Wage and Apprenticeship Initial Guidance  (11/29/2022) 
    FAQ: Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act  
    FAQ: Apprenticeships and the Inflation Reduction Act   
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  116 Green  and Resilient Retrofit Program - Grants and Loans  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Housing and Urban Development  
Bureau or Office: Office of Housing, Multifamily Housing, Office of Recapitalization  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  30002(a)(1) 
Program Description:  To provide grants and loans to HUD-assisted properties to improve 
energy or water efficiency; enhance indoor air quality or sustainability; implement the use of 
zero-emission electricity generation, low -emission building materials or processes , energy 
storage, or building electrification strategies; or make the properties more resilient to climate impacts. The law provides up to $4,000,000,000 in loan authority. 
Funding Amount : $837,500,000 
Period of Availability:  Funds for grants and direct loans available until September 30, 2028. 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants, loans 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Owner or sponsor of properties assisted pursuant to section 202 of the 
Housing Act of 1959, section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 as such section existed before the 
enactment of the Cranston -Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, section 811 of the 
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, section 8(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, section 236 of the National Housing Act, or a Housing Assistance Payments contract for Project -Based Rental Assistance in fiscal year 2021.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses: To fund projects at an eligible property that improve energy or water efficiency; enhance indoor air quality or sustainability; implement the use of zero -emission electricity 
generation, low-emission building materials or processes, energy storage, or building electrification strategies; or address climate resilience.  
Cost Share Requiremen ts: TBD  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  117 Green and Resilient Retrofit Program -  
Contracts and Cooperative Agreements  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Housing and Urban Development  
Bureau or Office: Office of Housing, Multifamily Housing, Office of Recapitalization  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  30002(a)(3) 
Program Description:  To cover expenses of contracts or cooperative agreements administered  
by the Secretary for the purpose of implementing the Green and Resilient Retrofit Program.  
Funding Amount: $60,000,000 
Period of Availability:  Until September 30, 2029 
Funding Mechanism:  Contracts, cooperative agreements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  N/A 
Tribal Eligibility: No  
Eligible Uses:  Contracts or cooperative agreements involved in implementation of the program. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  118 Green and Resilient Retrofit Program – Benchmarking  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Housing and Urban Development  
Bureau or Office: Office of Housing, Multifamily Housing, Office of Asset Management  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  30002(a)(4) 
Program Description:  To conduct energy and water benchmarking of HUD-assisted properties, 
provide associated data analysis and evaluation at the property and portfolio level, and develop 
information technology systems necessary for the collection, evaluation, and analysis of such data.  
Funding Amount:  $42,500,000 
Period of Availability:  Until September 30, 2028 
Funding Mechanism:  Federally -funded third party contract support 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients:  Owner or sponsor of properties assisted pursuant to section 202 of the 
Housing Act of 1959, section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 as such section existed before the enactment of the Cranston -Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, section 811 of the 
Cranston- Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, section 8(b) of the United States Housing 
Act of 1937, section 236 of the National Housing Act, or a Housing Assistance Payments contract for Project -Based Rental Assistance in fiscal year 2021.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Energ y and water benchmarking, along with associated data analysis and 
evaluation at the property and portfolio level, and the development of information technology systems necessary for the collection, evaluation, and analysis of such data. 
Cost Share Requirements:  TBD  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  119 Assistance for Latest and Zero Building Energy Code Adoption  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Energy  
Bureau or Office: Office of State and Community Energy Programs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location:  50131 
Program Description:  To provide grants to states or units of local government to adopt updated 
building energy codes, including the zero energy code. 
Funding Amount:  $1,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2029. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: States and local government with authority to adopt building codes. Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Grants to assist states and units of local government that have authority to adopt 
and implement building codes to (1) adopt codes for residential buildings that meet or exceed the 
2021 International Energy Conservation Code; and/or (2) adopt a building energy code for commercial buildings that meet or exceed the ANSI/ASHRAE/IES Standard 90.1–2019. 
Cost Share Requirements: No  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssista nce Listing
: TBD  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
120 Investing in a Sustainable, Lower -Carbon 
Federal Government  
 
As the largest direct purchaser of goods and services in the world, the U.S. government has the 
power to catalyze private sector investment in cleaner materials , products, and services by 
changing how it builds, buys, and manages electricity, vehicles, buildings, and other procurements. By executive order, President Biden committed
 the federal government to 
transform its  procurement and operations and transition to clean, zero-emission technologies.  
The Federal Sustainability Plan  outlines how the federal government can achieve net -zero 
emissions from overall federal operations by 2050, including achieving a net- zero greenhouse 
gas emissions building portfolio by 2045 and a 50 per cent reduction in emissions by 2032. On 
December 7, 2022, the Biden- Harris Administration announced  a Federal Building Performance 
Standard that direct s federal agencies to cut energy use and electrify equipment and appliances to 
achieve zero direct greenhouse gas  emissions in 30 percent of the building space owned by the 
federal government by square footage by 2030. 
The President also has committed to achieving  net-zero emis sions from federal procurement  by 
2050 while increasing the sustainability of federal supply chains. The Biden- Harris 
Administration launched a Federal Buy Clean Initiative  to promote the purchase of American -
made, lower -carbon construction materials, such as steel, concrete, asphalt, and flat glass 
products, in federal procurement and f ederally -funded projects. By leveraging the U.S. 
government’s purchasing power, President Biden is ensuring that American manufacturing is 
positioned to compete  and lead while catalyzing markets and accelerating innovation across the 
country. The Inflation Reduction Act includes several investments to make progress toward the se 
ambitious goals. 
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act creates and funds several programs that will help us meet the ambitious goal of net-zero federal procurement while building the market for low-carbon construction materials  and other advanced technologies. Highlights include:   
• Clean Postal Service Vehicles.  The Infla tion Reduction Act includes $3 billion for the 
U.S. Postal Service to purchase zero -emission delivery vehicles  and associated 
infrastructure.  
• Environmental Product Declaration (EPDs).  The Inflation Reduction Act provides 
$250 million to  support the development and standardization of Environmental Product 
Declaration (EPDs) —a document that presents  environmental information on the 
lifecycle of a product —including measurements of the embodied greenhouse gas 
emissions of construction materials and products.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  121 • Low Carbon Labeling for Construction Materials. The Inflation Reduction Act 
provides $100 million for the Environmental Protection Agency to work with the Federal Highway Administration  (FHWA) and General Services Administration (GSA) to 
develop and implement a program to identify and label construction materials and products that have substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions. 
• Procurement of Clean Construction Materials. The Inflation Reduction Act provides billions  to expand government procurement and funding of clean, lower -carbon 
construction materials and products, expanding the market for these crucial materials. The GSA received $2.15 billion to acquire and install construction materials and products that have substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions. The FHWA  
received $2 billion to reimburse or incentivize the use of low- embodied carbon 
construction materials and products in federally-funded highway projects.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
U.S. Postal Service  70002  U.S. Postal Service Clean Fleets  $3,000,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60112  Environmental Product Declaration 
Assistance  $250,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60116  Low Embodied Carbon Labeling for 
Construction Materials  $100,000,000  
General Services Administration  60502  Assistance for Federal Buildings  $250,000,000  
General Services Administration  60503  Use of Low -Carbon Materials  $2,150,000,000  
General Services Administration  60504  General Services Administration Emerging 
Technologies  $975,000,000  
Department of Transportation, 
Federal Highway Administration  60506  Low-Carbon Transportation Materials 
Program  $2,000,000,000  
Department of Homeland Security  70001  DHS Office of Chief Readiness Support 
Officer  $500,000,000  
 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  122 U.S. Postal Service Clean Fleets  
 
 
Federal Agency: U.S. Postal Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 70002 
Program Description: To purchase zero -emission delivery vehicles and to purchase, design, 
and install the requisite infrastructure to support zero -emission delivery vehicles at U.S. Postal 
Service facilities.  
Funding Amount:  $3,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipie nts: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  N/A 
Eligible Uses:  To purchase zero -emission delivery vehicles and to purchase, design, and install 
the requisite infrastructure to support zero- emission delivery vehicles at U.S. Postal Service 
facilities.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
Relevant Announcements:   USPS Intends to  Deploy Over 66,000 Electric Vehicles by 2028, 
Making One of the Largest Electric Vehicle Fleets in the Nation  
(12/20/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  123 Environmental Product Declaration Assistance  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60112 
Program Description: To support the development and standardization of environmental 
product declarations, including measurements of the embodied greenhouse gas emissions of construction materials and products. 
Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants, cooperative agr eements, contracts, technical 
assistance, direct federal spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Businesses that manufacture construction materials/products, and s tates, 
Tribes, and nonprofit organizations that will support such businesses Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Developing and verifying environmental product declarations; technical 
assistance; other activities that assist in measuring, reporting, and steadily reducing the quantity 
of embodied carbon in  construction materials and products. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  TBD. E xploring both non-competitive formula funding and competitive 
grants. 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  124 Low Embodied Car bon Labeling for Construction Materials  
 
 
Federal Agency: Environmental Protection Agency 
Bureau or Office: Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60116 
Program Description: To develop and implement a program to identify and label construction 
materials and products that have substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions.  
Funding Amount:  $100,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Competitive grants, cooperative agreements, contract, technical 
assistance, direct federal spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: TBD  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Work associated with identifying and labelling construction materials and 
products that have substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  TBD. E xploring both non-competitive formula funding and competitive 
grants. SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  125 Assistance for Federal Buildings  
 
 
Federal Agency: General Services Administration  
Bureau or Office: Real Property Activities  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60502 
Program Description: To convert GSA facilities to high -performance green buildings, as part 
of the Federal Buildings Fund. Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  Through September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct F ederal Spending 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Measures that improve a building’s environmental performance, including those 
that reduce energy, water, and material resource use; improve indoor environmental quality; 
reduce air and water pollution and  waste generation ; increase the use of environmentally 
preferable products; increase reuse and recycling opportunities; integrate systems in the building ; 
and reduce the environmental and energy impacts of transportation to and from the building. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
Relevant Announcements:  GSA Administrator Visits Arizona to Announce First Inflation 
Reduction Act Projects at Federal Facilities  (12/19/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  126 Use of Low -Carbon Materials 
 
 
Federal Agency: General Services Administration  
Bureau or Office: Real Property Activities  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60503 
Program Description: To acquire and install construction materials and products, for use in the 
construction or alteration of GSA buildings, that have substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions, as part of the Federal Buildings Fund. 
Funding Amount:  $2,150,000,000 
Period of Avai lability:  Through September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing for the construction and renovation of GSA federal buildings using 
materials and products determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to have 
substantially lower levels of embodied greenhouse gas emissions as compared to industry averages for similar materials or products. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
Relevant Announcements:  GSA Administrator Visits Arizona to Announce First Inflation 
Reduction Act Projects at Federal Facilities  (12/19/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  127 General Services Administration Emerging Technologies 
 
 
Federal Agency: General Services Administration  
Bureau or Office: Real Property Activities  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60504 
Program Description: To support emerging and sustainable technologies and related 
sustainability and environmental programs, as part of the Federal Buildings Fund. 
Funding Amount:  $975,000,000 
Period of Availability:  Through September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Providing for the purchase, installation, and implementation of emerging and 
sustainable technologies, along with GSA’s related sustainability and environmental programs. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
Relevant Announcements:  GSA Administrator Visits Arizona to Announce First Inflation 
Reduction Act Projects at Federal Facilities  (12/19/2022) 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  128 Low-Carbon Transportation Materials Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Transportation  
Bureau or Office: Federal Highway Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60506 
Program Description: To reimburse or provide incentives to eligible recipients for the use of 
low-embodied carbon construction materials and products in federally-funded highway projects. 
Funding Amount:  $2,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  Available until September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: (1) A state, unit of local government, political subdivision of a state, MPO, 
or U.S. territory; (2) Federally recognized Indian Tribe; (3) A special purpose district or public authority with a transportation function; or (4) Federal Land Management Agencies. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To reimburse or provide incentives to eligible recipients for the use, in projects, 
of construction materials and products that have substantially lower levels of embodied 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with all relevant stages of production, use, and disposal as compared to estimated industry averages of similar material or products.  
Cost Share Requirements:  The total federal share payable for the project for which the 
reimbursement or incentive is provided shall be up to 100%. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  129 Department of Homeland S ecurity   
Office of Chief Readiness Support Officer 
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Homeland Security  
Bureau or Office: Office of Chief Readiness Support Officer  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 70001 
Program Description: To execute and implement investments associated with sustainability and 
the environment across the Department. 
Funding Amount:  $500,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2028 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Real and Personal Property Sustainability, Resilience, Energy, Regional 
Management, Environmental Compliance, Environmental Justice, and Lease 
Consolidations/Efficiencies Investments.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
130 Harnessing Nature -Based Solutions and 
Climate -Smart Agriculture to Deliver 
Economic, Climate, and Resilience 
Benefits  
 
Nature-based solutions—actions to protect, sustainably manage, or restore natural or modified 
ecosystems to address societal challenges —offer tremendous opportunity in the fight against the 
climate crisis. Nature -based solutions include a range of practices, such as  protection and 
conservation of natural areas, restoration of habitats, and sustainable management of farms, fisheries, forests, or other resources. These practices have the dual benefit of mitigating climate change by removing and sequestering carbon while making ecosystems, forests, and agricultural land more resilient to climate impacts , including drought and wildfires. The Inflation Reduction 
Act invests billions in nature- based solutions and climate- smart sustainable agriculture to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, encourage new economic activity in rural areas, and protect the communities most vulnerable to wildfires, coastal floods, and other impacts of climate change.  
Suppor ting Climate -Smart Agriculture and Rural 
Economic Development  
 Our nation’s farmers and ranchers are responsible for harvesting much of the food and products that we depend on, but they are particularly vulnerable to climate change, as droughts, extreme rainfall events, and less predictable weather patterns can harm crop yields and livestock. These 
impacts can reverberate in local rural economies and throughout the U.S. economy as a whole.  
In Executive Order 14008
, “Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad ,” President Biden 
recognized the important role that America ’s farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners can play 
in combating the climate crisis and reducing emissions by sequestering carbon in soils, grasses, trees, and other vegetation and sourcing sustainable bioproducts and fuels. T he Inflation 
Reduction provides $19 billion to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to support farmers and ranchers in adopting and expanding climate- smart activities and systems .  
The Inflation Reduction Act also includes billions to support economic ally distressed farm loan 
borrowers, including those affected by pandemic- related market disruptions and climate -fueled 
natural disasters, and agriculture producers who may  have experienced discrimination in 
USDA’s farm lending programs. These and other programs to provide financial and technical assistance to underserved farmers and ranchers will boost rural economies and support farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners who may have not benefited from USDA’s programs in the past.  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  131 Funding Overview  
The Inf lation Reduction Act provides billions of dollars to USDA to invest in rural America, 
partner with  the agricultural sector to support sustainable and resilient food systems , and respond 
to the climate challenge. Highlights include:  
• $8.45 billion for the Environmental Quality Incentives Program, which will provide 
technical and financial assistance to producers to address natural resource concerns and deliver environmental benefits, such as improving soil carbon and sequestering carbon dioxide.  
• $4.95 billion for the Regional Conservation Partnership Program, which will support partner -driven conservation projects that help agricultural producers and nonindustrial 
private forestland owners improve soil carbon, sequester carbon dioxide, or otherwise reduce em issions.  
• $3.25 billion for the Conservation Stewardship Program, which will offer technical 
and financial assistance to compensate agricultural and forest producers who adopt 
conservation practices . 
• $3.1 billion to provide relief to distressed farm loan borrowers, many of whom have been hard hit by market disruptions during the COVID- 19 pandemic or natural disasters 
fueled by climate change. This assistance
 will help keep farmers on their land so they can 
produce the food, fiber, and fuel the country needs. On October 18, 2022, USDA 
provided  nearly $800 million in assistance to distressed borrowers to cure delinquent 
accounts and resolve loan debts for borrowers in foreclosure.  
 
See the table on the next page for a full list of the programs summarized in this chapter.  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  132 Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Agriculture  21001(a)(1)  Environmental Quality Incentives Program  $8,450,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  21001(a)(2)  Conservation Stewardship Program  $3,250,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  21001(a)(3)  Agricultural Conservation Easement Program  $1,400,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  21001(a)(4)  Regional Conservation Partnership Program  $4,950,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  21002(a)(1)  Conservation Technical Assistance $1,000,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  21002(a)(2)  Conservation Technical Assistance - Greenhouse 
Gas Emission Quantification Program  $300,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22006  Assistance for Distressed Borrowers  $3,100,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22007  USDA Assistance and Support for Underserved 
Farmers, Ranchers, Foresters: Technical and Other Assistance  $125,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22007  Increasing Land, Capital, and Market Access (Increasing Land Access) Program  $250,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22007  Equity Commission  $10,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22007  From Learning to Leading: Cultivating the Next 
Generation of Diverse Food and Agriculture 
Professionals  $250,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  22007  Assistance and Support for Underserved Farmers, Ranchers, and Foresters  $2,200,000,000  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  133 Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21001(a)(1) 
Program Description: To support the Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), 
which provides technical and financial assistance to producers to address natural resource concerns and deliver environmental benefits such as improved water and air quality, conserved ground and surface water, increased soil health and reduced soil erosion and sedimentation, improved or new wildlife habitat, and mitigation against drought and increasing weather volatility.  
Funding Amount:  $8,450,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agr eements, Grants, Contracts  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Agriculture producers (including nonindustrial private forest landowners and Indian Tribes), farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Technical and financial assistance to eligible agricultural producers to help 
implement conservation practices that address resource concerns related to organic production; 
soil, water, and air quality; wildlife habitat; nutrient management associated with crops and livestock; pest management; ground and surface water conservation; irrigation management; drought resiliency measures; adapting to and mitigating against increasing weather volatility; energy conservation; and related resource concerns. This funding will support practices that directly improve soil carbon, reduce nitrogen losses, or reduce, capture, avoid, or sequester carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide emissions associated with agricultural production. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Varies  
Formu la Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.912 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Requests Public Input on Implementation of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  134 Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP) 
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21001(a)(2) 
Program Description: To support the Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP), which offers 
technical and financial assistance to compensate agricultural and forest producers who agree to increase their level of conservation by adopting additional conservation activities and maintaining their baseline level of conservation. 
Funding Amount:  $3,250,000,000 
Perio d of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agreements, Grants, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Agriculture producers, farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Development of a conservation plan that outlines and enhances existing efforts, 
using new conservation practices or activities, based on management objectives for the operation 
to expand on the benefits of cleaner water and air, healthier soil , and better wildlife habitat, all 
while improving agricultural operations. CSP offers annual payments for implementing these practices on land and operating and maintaining existing conservation efforts. This funding will support practices that directly improve soil carbon, reduce nitrogen losses, or reduce, capture, avoid, or sequester carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide emissions associated with agricultural production. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Varies  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.924 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Reque sts Public Input on Implementation of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  135 Agricultural Conservation Easement Program (ACEP)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21001(a)(3) 
Program Description: To support the Agriculture Conservation Easement Program (ACEP), 
which helps landowners, land trusts, and other entities protect, restore, and enhance wetlands or protect working farms and ranches through conservation easements. 
Funding Amount:  $1,400,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agreements, Grants, Contracts, Easements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Co nservation entities, agriculture producers, farmers, ranchers, and forest 
landowners Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Protection, restoration, and enhancement of wetlands or protection of working 
farms and ranches through conservation easements. This funding will support easements or 
interests in land that will most reduce, capture, avoid, or sequester carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide emissions. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Varies  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.931 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Requests Public Input on Implementa tion of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  136 Regional Conservation Partnership Program (RCPP)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21001(a)(4) 
Program Description: To support the Regional Conservation Partnership Program (RCPP), a 
partner -driven approach to conservation that funds solutions to natural resource challenges on 
agricultural land by leveraging collective resources and collaborating to implement natural resource conservation activities. 
Funding Amount:  $4,950,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agreements, Grants, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Native American Organizations, Farmer/Rancher/Agriculture Producer, 
Land/Property Owner, State/Local Sponsored Organization, Federally Recognized Indian Tribal 
Governments. Producers in an approved partner project area who have priority resource concerns related to soil, water, and related natural resources, or who need assistance with complying with federal and state environment laws. A participant may be an owner, landlord, operator, or tenant 
of eligible agricultural lands or non-industrial forestlands. Limited resource producers, small-scale producers, social disadvantaged individuals, federally recognized Indian T ribal 
governments, Alaska natives, and Pacific Islanders are encouraged to apply. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  RCPP pr ojects may include a range of on-the-ground conservation activities 
implemented by farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners such as land management, 
improvement, and restoration practices; land rentals; and entity-held and U.S.- held easements. 
This funding will prioritize partnerships that support implementation of conservation projects that directly improve soil carbon, reduce nitrogen losses, or reduce, capture, avoid, or sequester carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide emissions associated with agricultural production. 
Cost Share Requirements:  Varies  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.932 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Requests Public Input on Implementation of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  137 Conservation Technical Assistance  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21002(a)(1) 
Program Description: To provide conservation technical assistance, which offers our nation’ s 
farmers, ranchers , and forestland owners the knowledge and tools they need to conserve, 
maintain, and restore the natural resources on their lands and improve the health of their 
operations for the future. 
Funding Amount:  $1,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agreements, Grants, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Individuals, groups, and communities that make natural resource 
management decisions on private, T ribal, an d other non- federal lands (e.g. conservation entities, 
agriculture producers, farmers, ranchers and forest landowners). Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  NRCS offers this assistance at no cost to the producers we serve. The goal is to 
give farmers, ranchers , and forestland owners personalized advice and information, based on the 
latest science and research, to help them make informed decisions.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.938 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Reques ts Public Input on Implementation of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  138 Conservation Technical Assistance -  
Greenhouse Gas Emission Quantification Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 21002(a)(2) 
Program Description: To provide conservation technical assistance through partnerships that 
will leverage the expertise, experience, and capacity of other organizations to address climate change an d to broaden the footprint of climate -smart agriculture. These monitoring and 
evaluation efforts will support the quantification of carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas emissions reductions, directly tied to the conservation program investments. 
Funding  Amount:  $300,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative Agreements, Grants, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Individuals, groups, and communities that make natural resource 
management decisions on private, Tribal, and other non-federal lands (e.g. conservation entities, 
agriculture producers, farmers, ranchers , and forest landowners). 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To carry out a program to quantify carbon sequestration and carbon dioxide, 
methane, and nitrous oxide emissions, through which the Natural Resources Conservation Service shall collect field -based data to assess carbon sequestration and reduction in carbon 
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide emissions outcomes and use the data to monitor and track those carbon sequestration and emissions trends through the Greenhouse Gas Inventory and Assessment Program of the Department of A griculture.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.938 
Relevant Announcements:  USDA Requests Public Input on Implementation of Inflation 
Reduction Act Funding (11/17/2022)   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  139 Assistance for Distressed Borrowers  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Farm Service Agency  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22006 
Program Description: To expedite assistance to distressed borrowers of direct or guaranteed 
loans administered by USDA’ s Farm Service Agency (FSA) whose operations face financial 
risk. In October 2022, w ith funding from the Inflation Reduction Act, USDA provided  nearly 
$800 million in payments to distressed borrowers to help cure delinquencies and resolve uncollectable farm loan debts.  
Funding Amount:  $3,100,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes. Tribal governments as well as individual Tribal members or 
organizations.  
Eligible Uses:  Direct federal spending  to expedite assistance to distress ed borrowers of direct or 
guaranteed loans administered by USDA’ s Farm Service Agency  whose operations face financial 
risk. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
Relevant Announcements:   USDA Provides Payments of nearly $800 Million in Assistance to 
Help Keep Farmers Farming  (10/18/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  140 USDA Assistance and Support for Underserved Farmers, Ranchers, 
Foresters: Technical and Other Assistance  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department o f Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Office of the Secretary  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22007 
Program Description: To provide funding for outreach, mediation, financial training, capacity 
building training, cooperative development and agricultural credit training and support, and other technical assistance on issues concerning food, agriculture, agricultural credit, agricultural extension, rural development, or nutrition to underserved farmers, ranchers, or forest landowners, including veterans, limited resource producers, beginning farmers and ranchers, and farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners living in high poverty areas. 
Funding Amount:  $125,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Cooperative A greements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Non -profit organizations and institutions of higher education 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Technical assistance and outreach to underserved farmers, ranchers , and foresters  
Cost Share Requirements:  0% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.234 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  141 Increasing Land, Capital, and Market Access  
(Increasing Land Access) Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or O ffice: Farm Service Agency  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22007 
Program Description: To help underserved producers by increasing land, capital, and market 
access. The program funds cooperative agreements or grants for projects that help move underserved producers from surviving to thriving. 
Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Cooperative Agreements 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Government entities from local to Tribal, not- for-profit educational 
institutions, and non-profit organizations. The non-profit organizations can include Community 
Development Financial Institutions, foundations, and Tribal financial i nstitutions with a 
501(c)(3) status.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Projects to improve land access (including heirs’ property and fractionated land 
issues) for underserved farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners, including veterans, limited resou rce producers, beginning farmers and ranchers, and farmers, ranchers, and forest 
landowners living in high poverty areas. 
Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.968 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  142 Equity Commission  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Office of the Secretary  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22007 
Program Description: To fund the activities of one or more equity commissions that will 
address racial equity issues within the USDA and the programs of the USDA. 
Funding Amount:  $10,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Direct  Federal Spending 
Tribal Eligibility:  N/A 
Eligible Uses:  Activities of one or more equity commissions.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  143 From Learning to Leading: Cultivating the Next Generation  
of Diverse Food and Agriculture Professionals (NEXTGEN)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: National Institutes of Food and Agriculture  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22007 
Program Description: To enable 1890 institutions, 1994 institutions, Alaska Native-serving 
institutions and Native Hawaiian -serving institutions, Hispanic-serving institutions, and insular 
area institutions of higher education located in the U.S. territories to build and sustain the next generation of the food, agriculture, natural resources, and human sciences workforce including the future USDA workforce primaril y by (a) providing student scholarship support, meaningful 
paid internships, fellowships, and job opportunity matching, and (b) facilitating opportunities to learn the processes and pathways leading to training and employment in the federal sector. 
Funding  Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: 1890 institutions, 1994 institutions, Alaska Native-serving institutions and 
Native Hawaiian -serving institutions, Hispanic-serving institutions, and insular area institutions 
of higher education located in the U.S. territories. 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  To support and supplement agricultural research, education, and extension, as 
well as scholarships and programs that provide internships and pathways to agricultural sector or 
federal employment.  
Cost Share Requirements:  0% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistan ce Listing
: 10.237 
    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  144 Assistance and Support for Underserved Farmers, Ranchers, and Foresters  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Office of the Secretary  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 22007 
Program Description: To provide financial assistance to producers that have experienced 
discrimination in the Department of Agriculture ’s farm lending programs prior to January 1, 
2021. USDA recently solicited  public input through a Request for Information (RFI) on how 
USDA should design and administer the program. The RFI is an important step in making sure 
farmers, advocates, academics, legislators, T ribal governments, and other experts can share their 
perspectives to assist USDA in implementing these provisions and fulfilling the intent of 
Congress.  
Funding Amount:  $2,200,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  TBD  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: TBD  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes. Tribal governments as well as individual Tribal members or 
organizations.  
Eligible Uses:  TBD  
Cost Share Requirements:  TBD  
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
Relevant Announcements :  USDA Seeking Public Comment on a New Provision to Provide 
Assistance to Agricultural Producers Who Have Experienced 
Discrimination (10/13/2022) 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  145 Preserving and Protecting the Nation ’s Lands and 
Waters for Climate Mitigation and Resilience  
 
In the first days of his Administration, President Biden issued Executive Order 14008 , “Tackling 
the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, ” which called for a bold, all of government approach to 
climate mitigation and resilience , including conserving, connecting, and restoring 30 percent of 
our lands and waters by 2030. To meet the ambition of that conservation goal, the Biden- Harris 
Administration launched America the Beautiful , a decade-long challenge to pursue a locally led 
and voluntary nationwide effort to conserve, connect, and restore the lands, waters, and wildlife 
upon which we all depend. In Oct ober of 2021, the Administration also stood up the Ocean 
Policy Committee, which is working to develop the nation ’s first ever Ocean Climate Action 
Plan to recruit the natural capacity of the ocean in fighting the climate crisis.  
On Earth Day 2022, President Biden took the next step and issued Executive Order 14072 , 
“Strengthening the Nat ion’s Forests, Communities, and Local Economies,” which called for 
science -based, sustainable forest and land management; conservation of America’ s mature and 
old-growth forests; investment in forest health and restoration; and deployment of climate- smart 
forestry practices and other nature-based solutions to improve the resilience of our lands, waters, wildlife, and communities in the face of worsening climate impacts. At  COP27 in Egypt, the 
Biden -Harris Administration released  the 
Nature -Based Solutions Roadmap  for how the United 
States can unlock the full potential of nature- based solutions to address climate change, nature 
loss, and inequity. 
The Inflation Reduction Act makes critical investments in the nation ’s lands and waters to  
protect ecosystems, encourage new economic activity around recreation, protect and restore important carbon sinks, and make landscapes more resilient to wildfires . In addition, the law 
invests in urban areas without adequate greenspace to mitigate  heat  island impacts and extre me 
heat emergencies.  This funding complements investments in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
for nature -based climate mitigation and resilience solutions , including significant resources for 
coastal ecosystems and wildfire prevention and response.  
Fundi ng Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act recognizes the importance of conserving, connecting, and restoring the nation’s coasts, marshes,  forests , and landscapes as a means to sequester carbon and deploy 
nature-based defenses to climate impacts. The law also prioritizes reducing the risks posed by catastrophic wildfires. Highlights include:  
• $2.6 billion to support coastal resilience and conservation, restoration, and protection of coastal and marine habitat and resources, including fisheries.  This 
complements nearly $3 billion in funding in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that will support vital ecosystems and the blue economy by reopening stream and river passage for fish, restoring marsh habitats that buffer storm surge and flooding, protecting corals from climate stress to serve as natural wave breaks that protect coastal economies, and restoring habitat nationwide. 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  146 • $1.8 billion to complete hazardous fuels reduction projects on National Forest 
System land within the wildland -urban interface, which is where structures and other 
human development meet or intermingle with undeveloped wildland. This investment complements more than $5 billion funding under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law  for 
hazardous fuels reduction and other wildfire mitigation and response efforts, including $1 billion for the new U.S. Forest Service Community Wildfire Defense Grant Program for At-Risk Communities and billions of dollars for hazardous fuels management strategies 
and wildfire management practices, particularly in areas within the wildland -urban 
interface.  
• $1.5 billion for the Urban and Community Forestry Assistance Program for tree planting and related activities . Urban and community forestry offers
 significant benefits 
for public health and local economies and mitigates the impact of dangerous heat waves.     
• $700 million for the Forest Legacy Program  to acquire lands that offer natural carbon 
sequestration benefits and $500 million to carry out conservation, habitat restoration, and resiliency projects  on lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management and 
the National Park Service.  
 
See the table on the next page for a full list of the programs summarized in this chapter.    
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  147 Programs Covered in This Chapter 
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Agriculture  23001(a)(1)  Hazardous Fuels Reduction Projects in Wildland 
Urban Interface  $1,800,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23001(a)(2)  Vegetation and Watershed Management Projects  $200,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23001(a)(4)  Develop and Implement Activities and Tactics for 
Old Growth  $50,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23002(a)(1)  Assistance to Underserved Forest Landowners - 
Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience Practices  $150,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23002(a)(2)  Assistance to Underserved Forest Landowners - Emerging Private Markets for Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience 
$150,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23002(a)(3)  Assistance to Forest Landowners with <2,500 Acres of Forestland - Emerging Private Markets for 
Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience  $100,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23002(a)(4)  Payments to Private Forestland Landowners for Implementation of Forestry Practices  $50,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23002(a)(5)  Wood Innovations Grant Program  $100,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23003(a)(1)  Forest Legacy Program  $700,000,000  
Department of Agriculture  23003(a)(2)  Urban and Community Forestry Assistance Program  $1,500,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50221  Conservation and Resilience  $250,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50222  Conservation and Ecosystem Restoration $250,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50223  National Park Service Employees  $500,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50224  National Park Service Deferred Maintenance  $200,000,000  
Department of the Interior  60301  Endangered Species Act Recovery Plans  $125,000,000  
Department of the Interior  60302  Refuge System Resiliency  $125,000,000  
Department of Commerce  40001  Investing in Coastal Communities and Climate 
Resilience  $2,600,000,000  
Department of Commerce  40002  Facilities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration and National Marine Sanctuaries  $200,000,000  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  148 Hazardous Fuels Reduction Projects in Wildland Urban Interface  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23001(a)(1) 
Program Description: To complete hazardous fuels reduction projects on National Forest 
System land within the w ildland -urban i nterface.  
Funding Amount:  $1,800,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: National Forests and Grasslands 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  “Hazardous fuels reduction project” means an activity, including the use of 
prescribed fire, to protect structures and com munities from wildfire that is carried out on 
National Forest Service lands. Focus for projects is within the w ildland -urban interface, as 
defined in section 101 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003. Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  149 Vegetation and Watershed Management Projects  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23001(a)(2) 
Program Description: To enhance ecological integrity and restoration as prescribed in a Water 
Source Protection Plan or Watershed Restoration Action Plan. 
Funding Amount:  $200,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: National Forests and Grasslands Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Watershed improvement; vegetation treatments  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  150 Develop and Implement Activities and Tactics for Old Growth  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture 
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23001(a)(4) 
Program Description: To establish definitions for mature and old-growth forests; conduct an 
inventory of forest  conditions; and develop a policy or process to conserve those conditions. 
Funding Amount:  $50,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30,  2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: National Forests and Grasslands 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Inventory of old growth and mature forests, policy development. 
Cost Share Requir ements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  151 Assistance to Underserved Forest Landowners -  
Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience Practices  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23002(a)(1) 
Program Description: To assist underserved forest landowners in carrying out climate 
mitigation or forest resilience practices.  
Funding Amount:  $150,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Non -Industrial Private Forests  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Technical assistance to underserved forest landowners 
Cost Share Requirements:  20% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  152 Assistance to Underserved Forest Landowners -  
Emerging Private Mark ets for Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23002(a)(2) 
Program Description: To support the participation of underserved forest landowners in 
emerging private markets for climate mitigation or forest resilience.  
Funding Amount:  $150,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Non -Industr ial Private Forests  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Technical assistance with emerging markets  
Cost Share Requirements:  20% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  153 Assistance to Forest Landowners with <2,500 Acres of Forestland -  
Emerging Private Markets for Climate Mitigation and Forest Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23002(a)(3) 
Program Description: To support the participation of forest landowners who own less than 
2,500 acres of forestland in emerging private markets for climate mitigation or forest resilience.  
Funding Amount:  $100,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Non -Industrial Private Forests  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Technical assistance to  forest landowners with less than 2,500 acres  
Cost Share Requirements:  20% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  154 Payments to Private Forestland Landowners for  
Implementation of Forestry Practices  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23002(a)(4) 
Program Description: To assist states and other eligible entities in providing payments to 
private forestland landowners for implementation of forestry practices on private forest land that provide measurable increases in carbon sequestration and storage beyond customary practices on comparable land.  
Funding Amount:  $50,000,000 
Period of Availab ility:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Non -Industrial Private Forests  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Financial assistance to private forestland landowners 
Cost Share Requirements:  20% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  155 Wood Innovations Grant Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23002(a)(5) 
Program Description: To provide grants under the wood innovation grant program under 
section 8643 of the Agriculture Improvement Act, including for the construction of new facilities that advance the purposes of the program and for the hauling of material removed to reduce hazardous fuels to locations where that material can be utilized.  
Funding Amount:  $100,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September  30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Existing forest product businesses 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Wood products innovations, construction of facilities 
Cost Share Requirements:  20% 
Formula  Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.674 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  156 Forest Legacy Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23003(a)(1) 
Program Description: To provide competitive grants to states through the Forest Legacy 
Program to acquire land and interests in land. 
Funding Amount:  $700,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: States  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To purchase interest in land or easements 
Cost Share Requirements:  25%, but any non- federal cost -share requirement otherwise 
applicable to projects carried out under this section may be waived at the discretion of the 
Secretary.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : 10.676 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  157 Urban and Community Forestry Assist ance Program  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Agriculture  
Bureau or Office: Forest Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 23003(a)(2) 
Program Description: To provide grants through the Urban and Community Forestry 
Assistance Program for tree planting and related activities . 
Funding Amount:  $1,500,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: A state agency, a local governmental entity, an agency or governmental entity of the District of Columbia, an agency or governmental entity of an insular area (as defined in section 1404 of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 3103)), an Indian Tribe, or a nonprofit organization. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Tree planting and related activities  
Cost Share Requirements:  50%, but any non- federal cost -share requirement otherwise 
applicable to projects carried out under this section may be waived at the discretion of the 
Secretary.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 10.675 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  158 Conservation and Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Land Management and National Park Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50221 
Program Description: To carry out projects for the conservation, protection, and resiliency of 
lands and resources administered by the Bureau of Land Management and the National Park Service.  
Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts, and/or Financial Assistance 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To carry out projects for the conservation, protection, and resiliency of lands and 
resources administered by the Bureau of Land Management and the National Park Service. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  159 Conservation and Ecosystem Restoration  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Land Management and National Park Service 
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50222 
Program Description: To carry out conservation and ecosystem and habitat restoration projects 
on lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management and t he National Park Service.  
Funding Amount:  $250,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts, and/or Financial Assistance 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To carry out conservation and ecosystem and habitat restoration projects on lands 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management and the National Park Service. 
Cost S hare Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  160 National Park Service Employees 
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: National Park Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50223 
Program Description: To hire employees to serve in units of the National Park System or 
national historic or national scenic trails administered by the National Park Service.  
Funding Amount:  $500,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2030. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  These funds will be used to hire employees to provide additional capacity to all 
eligible units and trails.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  161 National Park Service Deferred Maintenance  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: National Park Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50224 
Program Description: To complete priority deferred maintenance projects within the 
boundaries of the National Park System.  
Funding Amount:  $200,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  The funds will be used to complete priority deferred maintenance projects within 
the boundaries of the National Park System and return assets to good condition. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  162 Endangered Species Act Recovery Plans  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60301 
Program Description: To develop Species Status Assessments (foundational information and 
analysis for recovery planning) and recovery plans for listed species and to conduct recovery implementation actions.  
Funding Amount:  $125,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until expended. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Cooperative Agreements, Direct Federal Spending 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: States, Local Governments, Tribes, Private Landowners 
Tribal  Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Writing and updating recovery plans and implementing recovery actions for 
threatened and endangered species.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.g ov A ssistance Listing
: 15.657 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  163 Refuge System Resiliency  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 60302 
Program Description: To fund projects on National Wildlife Refuges and state wildlife 
management areas that combat invasive species, restore and increase the resiliency of habitats, and/or build resilient infrastructure, with a focus on nature-based solutions where possible. 
Funding Amount:  $125,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Contracts 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct federal spending and individuals. 
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Rebuilding and restoring units of the National Wildlife Refuge System and state 
wildlife management areas by (1) addressing the threat of invasive species; (2) increasing the 
resiliency and capacity of habitats and infrastructure to withstand climate-induced wea ther 
events; and (3) reducing the amount of damage caused by climate- induced weather events.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  164 Investing in Coastal Communities and Climate Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Commerce  
Bureau or Office: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 40001 
Program Description: To support coastal resilience, coastal communities, and conservation, 
restoration, and protection of coastal and marine habitat and resources, including fisheries. 
Funding Amount:  $2,600,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct feder al spending, contracts, grants, cooperative agreements, or 
technical assistance  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Coastal states (as defined in the Coastal Zone Management Act), the 
District of Columbia, Tribal governments, nonprofit organizations, local governments, and institutions of higher education. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Conservation, restoration, and protection of coastal and marine habitats and 
resources, including fisheries, to enable coastal communities to prepare for extreme storms and 
other changing climate conditions, and for projects that support natural resources that sustain coastal and marine resource dependent communities, and for related administrative expenses.  
Cost Share Requirements:  TBD  
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  165 Facilities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric  
Administration and National Marine Sanctuaries  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Commerce  
Bureau or Office: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 40002 
Program Description: To support the construction of National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  (NOAA) facilities and facilities that support the National Marine Sanctuary 
System.  
Funding Amount:  $200,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Construction of new facilities (including facilities in need of replacement) 
including piers, marine operations facilities, and fisheries laboratories and construction of facilities to support the National Marine Sanctua ry System . 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  
166 Increasing the Resilience of Our 
Communities in a Changing Climate  
 
From wildfires engulfing entire towns, to more frequent and extreme heatwaves and drought 
conditions, to supercharged hurricanes and other storms battering our coasts, Americans of every stripe are affected by climate change. As we take urgent action to rapidly cut emissions fueling the crisis, the United States also needs to prepare for and adapt to the unavoidable impacts. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law made a historic down payment on strengthening the country’s climate resilience, and the Inflation Re duction Act will go even further with new funding to 
mitigate extreme drought, support Tribal and other communities that are most vulnerable to climate impacts, and improve the nation ’s ability to forecast extreme weather.  
Strengthening Communities ’ Resil ience to Drought, 
Flooding, and Other Climate Impacts  
 Communities across the country are already feeling the impacts of climate change in the form of more frequent and intense precipitation events, flooding, heat waves, drought, storms, and wildfires. According to the National Climate Assessment
, lower-income and other marginalized 
communities may be the most vulnerable to these impacts, as they often live in higher- risk areas 
and have lower capacity to prepare for and cope with extreme weather and climate- related 
events. Although the world can avert the worst impacts of climate change with bold and urgent action to cut emissions, the U.S. government is working to strengthen communit ies’ resilience to 
growing climate hazards and help them adapt in order to avoid additional damage to  human 
health , neighborhoods, and livelihoods.  
In addition to investing in nature- based climate resilience measures, as described earlier in this 
guidebook, the Inflation Reduction Act funds several programs to address the effects of extreme 
drought in the Western United States and provides financial and technical assistance to communities most at risk  from  climate impacts. This funding complements the investments in 
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which included historic funding—nearly $38 billion—to protect the nation’s infrastructure and communities from a range of natural and manmade hazards, from cyber threats to climate change.  
Funding Overview  
The Inflation Reduction Act provides much- needed resources for communities in the American 
West suffering from extreme drought and funding for parts of the United States—inclu ding 
Tribal lands and Insular Areas—that are particularly vulnerable to climate  impacts. Highlights 
include: 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  167 • $4 billion for Bureau of Reclamation projects to mitigate the extreme drought conditions 
in the Colorado River Basin, as well as other basins exper iencing comparable levels of 
long-term drought. This funding builds on the $8.3 billion  the Bureau of Reclamation 
received for drought mitigation and response under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to improve the resilience of Western water infrastructure.  
• $550 million for Bureau of Reclamation projects to provide domestic water supplies to disadvantaged communities or households that do not have reliable access to domestic water supplies.  
• $235 million to support T ribal climate resilience efforts , including fish hatcheries.  
 
Programs Covered in This Chapter  
Agency  IRA Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of the Interior  50231  Domestic Water Supply Projects  $550,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50232  Canal Improvement Projects  $25,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50233  Drought Mitigation  $4,000,000,000  
Department of the Interior  80004  Emergency Drought Relief for Tribes  $12,500,000  
Department of the Interior  50241  Climate Change Technical Assistance for 
Territories  $15,900,000  
Department of the Interior  80001(a),(c)  Tribal Climate Resilience  $225,000,000  
Department of the Interior  80001(b)  Tribal Climate Resilience: Fish Hatchery 
Operations and Maintenance  $10,000,000  
Department of the Interior  80002  Native Hawaiian Climate Resilience  $25,000,000  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  168  
Strengthening Resilience for Populations Most Vulnerable to Climate Impacts  
Although climate change puts all residents of the United States at risk, some populations are 
more vulnerable than others . Climate -related changes in weather patterns interact with 
underlying socioeconomic factors, such as income level, age, and access to affordable health care 
and transportation. The National Climate Ass essment has concluded  that children, older adults, 
persons with disabilities, low-income communities, and some communities of color may be more 
exposed and sensitive  to heat, pollution, and extreme weather events, live in the most risk -prone 
areas , and/or have the least access to resources to prepare for and recover from climate- related 
impacts.  
As described earlier in this guidebook, the Inflation  Reduction Act creates a $3 billion 
Environmental and Climate Justice Block Grant Program to provide grants and technical 
assistance to community -based organizations to improve community resilience to climate 
impacts , including extreme heat and wildfire, among other funded a ctivities . The law also gives 
$1 billion to the Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Green and Resilient 
Retrofit Program to make America ’s affordable housing stock more energy efficient and resilient 
to extreme weather events.  
For Tribes, climate change endangers more than their health and physical safety; it also threatens 
livelihoods and cultural values rooted in agriculture, hunting and gathering, and spiritual 
connections to certain ecosystems, nature- based practices, and sites. The Inf lation Reduction Act 
includes $12.5 million in emergency drought relief for Tribes and $235 million for climate 
resilience planning to protect Tribal communities and sustain Tribes ’ natural and cultural 
resources , including funding for Tribal fish hatcheri es. 
The Inflation Reduction Act also provides $25 million for Native Hawaiians to cope with the 
impacts of climate change on their unique community and nearly $16 million for technical 
assistance to American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the 
U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico for climate change planning, adaptation, and resilience. 
These island territories  are particularly vulnerable to sea level rise and often lack the resources to 
prepare for and recover from hurricanes and tropical storms. 
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  169 Domestic Water Supply Projects  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Reclamation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50231 
Program Description: To provide domestic water supplies to disadvantaged communities or 
households that do not have reliable access to domestic water supplies. 
Funding Amount:  $550,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Contracts, or Financial Ass istance Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Disadvantaged communities in states covered by the Bureau  of 
Reclamation.  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To provide up to 100 percent of the cost of planning, design, or construction of 
water projects with the primary purpose of providing domestic water supplies to communities or 
households without reliable access to domestic water supplies in a Reclamation s tate or territory . 
Cost Share Requirements:  Cost share to be determined by the Commissioner of Reclamation. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : TBD  
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  170 Canal Improvement Projects 
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Reclamation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50232 
Program Description: To design, study, and implement projects to cover canals with solar 
panels.  
Funding Amount:  $25,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through Septemb er 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To fund the design, study, and implementation of projects (including pilot and 
demonstr ation projects) to cover water conveyance facilities with solar panels to generate 
renewable energy  or other Reclamation projects that increase water efficiency and assist in clean 
energy goals. 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  171 Drought Mitigation  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Reclamation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50233 
Program Description: To complete short-term bridging actions and longer- term durable actions 
to protect the Colorado River and the 40 million people it serves as well as other basins 
experiencing a comparable level of long- term drought, such as the Sacramento-San Joaquin, 
Klamath, and Rio Grande Basins. 
Funding Amount:  $4,000,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Contracts, or Financial Assistance Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing 
Eligible Recipients: Public Entities and Indian Tribes Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To provide funding for projects ensuring that (1) conserved water will benefit 
basins experiencing long-term drought and (2) the conserved water is not diverte d for 
consumptive use for a period of time or in perpetuity based on certain criteria.  Cost Share Requirements:  None required, but subject to determination by the Commissioner. 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 15.514 
Related Announcements:   Inflation Reduction Act Funds Landmark Agreements to 
Accelerate Salton Sea Restoration  (11/28/2022) 
Biden -Harris Administration Announces New Steps for Drought 
Mitigation Funding from Inflation Reduction Act  ( 10/12/2022) 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  172 Emergency Drought Relief for Tribes  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of th e Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Reclamation  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 80004 
Program Description: To fund near-term drought relief actions to mitigate drought impacts for 
Indian Tribes affected by the operation of a Bureau of Reclamation water project, including water shortages, and to mitigate the loss of Tribal trust resources. 
Funding Amount:  $12,500,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants or Cooperative Agreements , including but not limited to PL 93 -
638 agreements. New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Tribes  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  To fund projects designed to mitigate near -term drought impacts for Indian Tribes 
that are affected by the operation of a Bureau of Reclamation water project , including direct 
financial assistance to address drinking water shortages and to mitigate the loss of Tribal 
resources . 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 15.519 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  173 Climate Change Technical Assistance for Territories  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Office of Insular Affairs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50241 
Program Description: To provide technical assistance the U.S. Insular Areas for climate change 
planning, mitigation, adaptation, and resilience, including American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. 
Funding Amount:  $15,900,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2026. 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants, Interagency Agreements, and Direct Federal Spending 
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Territorial Governments and Direct Federal Spending Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  The funds will support technical assistance to the U.S. Insular Areas for climate 
change planning, mitigation, adaptation, and resilience projects. Cost Share Requirements:  No 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 15.875 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  174 Tribal Climate Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Indian Affairs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 80001(a),(c)  
Program Description: To support climate resilience planning to help sustain Tribal ecosystems 
and natural and cultural resources, economies, infrastructure, human health, and safety. 
Funding Amount:  $225,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts, or Financial Assistance 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  and Tribes  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Habitat restoration and adaptation activities, community directed relocation, and 
other activities.  
Cost Share Requirements:  0% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : 15.156 
Relevant Announcements:  Biden -Harris Administration Makes $135 Million Commitment to 
Support Relocation of Tribal Communities Affected by Climate 
Change  (11/20/2022) 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  175 Tribal Climate Resilience: Fish Hatchery Operations and Maintenance  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Bureau of Indian Affairs  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 80001(b)  
Program Description: To extend the life of 88 Tribal hatcheries across the nation and to support 
hatchery  rearing and stocking programs. 
Funding Amount:  $10,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2031 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts, or Financial Assistance 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal Spending  and Tribes  
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes 
Eligible Uses:  Fish hatchery maintenance and operations.  
Cost Share Requirements:  0% 
Formula Fun ding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : 15.156 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  176 Native Hawaiian Climate Resilience  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: Office of Native Hawaiian Relations  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 80002 
Program Description: To develop and implement a new Native Hawaiian Climate Resilience 
Program that helps the Native Hawaiian Community cope with the effects of climate change by taking actions that maintain the integrity and identity of the Native Hawaiian Community while also building the capacity for adaptation, learning, and transformation. 
Funding Amount:  $25,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct Federal Spending, Grants, Contracts and/or Cooperative 
Agreements  
New or Existing Program:  New  
Eligible Recipients: Direct Federal, State/Local Government, Native Hawaiian Community 
Representatives (Native Hawaiian Organizations), Universities, Non-Governmental Organizations 
Tribal Eligibility:   
Eligible Uses:  Eligible uses may include climate change communication, education, and 
research; environmental hazard analysis; natural and cultural resource management and 
protection; socio-cultural communication, education, and research; adaptation planning; sustainability technical assistance; and access to related federal/state/county programs.  
Cost Share Requirements:  0% 
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: TBD  
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  177 Improving Climate Science and Weather Forecasting 
 
Strengthening America’s resilience to climate change depends on continuing to hone scientists’ 
ability to understand, model, and track potential climate impac ts and extreme weather events  
with greater specificity and longer lead -times . Better scientific understanding of how a warmer 
ocean intensifies a hurricane or what path a potential hurricane may take, for example, can help federal, Tribal, state, and local governments make difficult decisions about evacuations, prepositioning of response assets, and resource allocations. B etter seasonal and interannual 
forecasting of soil moisture, temperature, and precipitation can allow agricultural producers to make informed decisions about what to plant and when; municipalities to purchase deicing materials and contract for snow removal ; and businesses to plan in advance. The Inflation 
Reduction Act invests in the latest forecasting science and technology and  3-D mapping 
programs at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and U.S. Geological Survey.  
 
Programs Covered in This  Chapter  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Program Name  Amount  
Department of Commerce  40004  Research and Forecasting for Weather and Climate $200,000,000  
Department of Commerce  40005  Computing Capacity and Research for Weather, 
Oceans, and Climate  $190,000,000  
Department of Commerce  40006  Acquisition of Hurricane Forecasting Aircraft  $100,000,000  
Department of the Interior  50271  USGS 3D Elevation Program (3DEP)  $23,500,000  
   
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  178 Research and Forecasting for Weather and Climate  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Commerce  
Bureau or Office: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 40004 
Program Description: To support advancements and improvements in research, observation 
systems, modeling, forecasting, assessments, and dissemination of information related to weather, coasts, oceans, and climate, including climate research.  
Funding Amount:  $200,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Grants ($50 million); TBD ($150 million) 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: TBD  
Tribal Eligibility:  TBD  
Eligible Uses:  Projects that accelerate advances and improvements in research, observation 
systems, modeling, forecasting, assessments, and dissemination of information related to weather, coasts, oceans, and climate, including climate research  
Cost Share Requirements:  TBD  
Formula Funding:  TBD  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: 11.459 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  179 Computing Capacity and Research for Weather, Oceans, and Climate  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Commerce  
Bureau or Office: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 40005 
Program Description: To procure additional high-performance computing, data processing 
capacity, data management, and storage assets and for transaction agreements under the Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017. 
Funding Amount:  $190,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct federal spending (procurement, transaction agreements)  
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct federal spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Procurement of additional high-performance computing, data processing capacity, 
data management, and storage assets and for transaction agreements under the Weather Research 
and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017 
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing
: N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  180 Acquisition of Hurricane Forecasting Aircraft  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of Commerce  
Bureau or Office: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 40006 
Program Description: To purchase new hurricane hunter aircraft.  
Funding Amount:  $100,000,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available until September 30, 2026 
Funding Mechanism:  Direct federal spending (acquisition) 
New or Existing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Direct federal spending  
Tribal Eligibility:  No 
Eligible Uses:  Acquisition of hurricane hunter aircraft.  
Cost Share Requirements:  N/A  
Formula Funding:  N/A  
SAM.gov A ssistance Listing : N/A 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION  2  181 USGS 3D Elevation Program (3DEP)  
 
 
Federal Agency: Department of the Interior  
Bureau or Office: U.S. Geological Survey  
 
 
IRA Statutory Location: 50271 
Program Description: To help achieve complete national 3D Elevation Program (3DEP) 
baseline coverage, help to ensure efficient and timely data processing and delivery, and support research and acquisition to help establish the 3D National Topography Model (3DNTM). The 
3DNTM is the terrestrial component of the 3D Nation vision shared with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for delivering a continuous information surface from the depths of our oceans to the peaks of our mountains. This program supports the U.S. Geological Survey’ s 
core mission to provide information that leads to reduced loss of life and damage to property and infrastructure from hazards like landslides, earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and wildfires. 
Funding Amount:  $23,500,000 
Period of Availability:  To remain available through September 30, 2031. 
Funding Mechanism:  Contracts, Cooperative and Joint Funding Agreements, Direct Federal 
Spending New or Exist ing Program:  Existing  
Eligible Recipients: Cooperative funding and joint funding agreements with federal/state/local 
governments/ Tribes/ private entities; task orders to private mapping firms  and other government 
contractors  via the USGS Geospatial Products  and Services Contracts  and Technical Services 
Support Contract. 
Tribal Eligibility:  Yes. Tribes are eligible to submit proposals to the 3DEP Broad Agency 
Announcement (BAA) solicitation. Eligible Uses:  Acquiring 3D Elevation data to advance the goal of completing national 3DEP 
baseline coverage; ensuring efficient and timely data processing and delivery; and supporting 
research and data acquisition to help establish the 3D National Topography Model 
Cost Share Requirements:  State and local applicants requ esting an award in the form of a 
cooperative agreement must contribute a minimum of 25% state and/or local funds to the 
collective applicant cost share.  
Formula Funding:  No 
SAM.gov A ssistance List ing
: 15.817 
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION 2  
182 Making Permitting of Energy Infrastructure 
More Efficient and Effective  
 
Achieving the President’s ambitious goal of net-zero emissions by no later than 2050 will require 
building new transmission lines and clean energy projects at a pace and scale that is 
unprecedented in U.S. history and securing the critical minerals and materials to power the transition . To make this transformation happen, U.S. government agencies will need to conduct 
efficient and effective environmental reviews that protect America’ s air and water quality, 
address climate change, conserve important landscapes, consider impacts to communities with environmental justice concerns, and honor the nation’s Tribal trust responsibilities. Robust , early  
public engagement and comment on proposed projects will be critical for building community trust in and support for these projects and helping ensure timely delivery of permits.   
In May 2022, the Biden- Harris Administration released a new Permitting Action Plan
 to 
strengthen and accelerate federal permitting and environmental reviews. The Inflation Reduction 
Act provides more than $1 billion to support environmental reviews at key agencies and White House components. This includes :  
• $350 million for the Federal Permitting Improvement Steering Council,  which the 
Permitting Action Plan tasked with coordinating environmental review among federal agencies an d resolving issues consistent with the Administration’s climate, economic, 
and equity goals. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law gave the Permitting Council new authorities, including the ability to facilitate infrastructure projects proposed by Tribes on Tribal lands, accelerate information sharing and troubleshooting to avoid and resolve 
potential conflicts and bottlenecks before they emerge, and help agencies find new resources as needed for permitting work. 
• $30 million for the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), which oversees the implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of federal environmental reviews to ensure that infrastructure is well-designed, well-built, and meets the needs of communities. CEQ plans to add staff to support federal agencies; bolster training for federal employees on how to conduct efficient and effective environmental reviews; and develop information tools, guidance, and techniques to increase efficiency  and clari ty and improve community engagement in 
federal decisions.  
• $625 million to multiple federal agencies  to support efficient environmental reviews 
that are timely , robust, and conducted through a transparent process that includes 
community engagement. Agencies will use funds to hire and train personnel and develop tools, techniques, and guidance to improve transparency, accountability, and public engagement.   
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION 2  183  
Funding for Effective and Efficient Environmental Reviews  
Agency  IRA 
Section  Funding 
Availability  Amount  
U.S. Department of Agriculture,  
U.S. Forest Service  23001  Until 9/30/2031  $100,000,000  
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  40003  Until 9/30/2026  $20,000,000  
Department of Energy  50301  Until 9/30/2031  $115,000,000  
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 50302  Until 9/30/2031  $100,000,000  
Department of the Interior * 50303  Until 9/30/2026  $150,000,000  
Environmental Protection Agency  60115  Until 9/30/2026  $40,000,000  
Council on Environmental Quality  60402  Until 9/30/2026  $30,000,000  
Department of Transportation , 
Federal Highway Administration  60505  Until 9/30/2026  $100,000,000  
Federal Permitting Improvement Steering Council  70007  Until 9/30/2031  $350,000,000  
      $1,005,000,000  
 
* This is for the National Park Service, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management, Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, and Office of 
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.  
 
This section does not include one- page summaries for these programs, as they are primarily 
direct federal spending. Future versions of this guidebook may contain more detailed 
information.  
 
 
  
 
BUILDING  A CLEAN  ENERGY  ECONOMY    
GUIDEBOOK  | JANUARY  2023  | VERSION 2 184  