 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  
NATIONAL DRUG 
CONTROL STRATEGY  
 
 
THE WHITE HOUSE  
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT  
OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY  
 

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  
Table of Contents  
Glossary  .......................................................................................................................................... 1 
To the Congress of the United States  .............................................................................................. 5 
Preface from Dr. Gupta, Director  ................................................................................................... 6 
Introduction: Saving Lives is Our North Star  ................................................................................. 8 
Prevention and Early Intervention  ................................................................................................ 17 
Harm Reduction  ............................................................................................................................ 30 
Substance Use Disorder Treatment  ............................................................................................... 45 
Building a Recovery-Ready Nation  .............................................................................................. 60 
Reduce the Supply of Illicit Substances through Domestic Collaboration  ................................... 76 
Reduce the Supply of Illicit Substances through International Engagement  ................................ 85 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety  ............................................................................................... 98 
Data Systems and Research  ........................................................................................................ 106 
Appendix A —Developing a Data Plan  ....................................................................................... 123 
Works Cited  ................................................................................................................................ 126 
 
 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  1 Glossa ry  
AAMC: American Association of Medical Colleges  
ACEs: Adverse Childhood Experiences  
ACF: Administration for Children and Families  
ADAM: Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring  
AML: Anti -Money Laundering  
APG: Alternative Peer Group  
ARTS: Addiction and Recovery Treatment Services  
ASPE:  Assistant Secretary on Planning and Evaluation  
BIPOC: Black, Indigenous, and People of Color  
BJA: Bureau of Justice Assistance  
BOP: Federal Bureau of Prisons  
BSA: Bank Secrecy Act  
CADCA: Community Anti -Drug Coalition s of America  
CBP: United States Customs and Border Protection  
CCDB: Consolidated Counterdrug Database  
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
CDEWS: Community Drug Early Warning System  
CICAD: Organization of American States Inter -American Drug Abuse Control Commission  
CMS: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
CoP: Community of Practice  
CRP: Collegiate Recovery Program  
DAWN: Drug Abuse Warning Network  
DEA: Drug Enforcement Administration  
DFC: Drug -Free Communities  
DHS: United States Department of Homeland Security  
DIO: Drug Intelligence Officer  
DOD: United States Department of Defense  
DOI: United States Department of the Interior  
DOJ: United States Department of Justice  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  2 DOL: United States Department of Labor  
DOS: Department of State  
DOT: United States Department of Transportation  
EBPRC: Evidence -Based Practices Resource Center  
EBT: evidence -based treatment  
ED: United States Department of Education  
EDR: electronic death registration  
EDWG: Equitable Data Working Group  
EMCDDA: European Monitoring Centre of Drugs and Drug Addiction  
EMS: Emergency Medical Services  
EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency  
FDA: Food and Drug Administration  
FTS: fentanyl test strips  
HHS: United States Department of Health and Human Services  
HIDTA: High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area  
HRSA: Health Resources and Services Administration  
HUD: U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development  
ICD: International Classification of Diseases  
IHS: Indian Health Service  
INCB: International Narcotics Control Board  
INL: Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs  
IRS: Internal Revenue Service  
LGBTQ: lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer  
ME/C: medical examiner or coroner  
MEXK -54: Monitoring System of Illicit Crops in Mexico Program  
MOUD: medications for opioid use disorder  
N-SSATS: National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services  
NADCP: National Association of Drug Court Professionals  
NADD: North America Drug Dial ogue  
NARR: National Alliance for Recovery Residences  
NASADAD: National Association of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  3 NCHS: National Center for Health Statistics  
NDCI: National Drug Court Institute  
NIAAA: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse  and Alcoh olism 1 
NIC: National Institute of Corrections  
NIDA: National Institute on Drug Abuse1 
NIH: National Institutes of Health  
NIJ: National Institute of Justice  
NIOSH: National Institute on Occupational Safety and Health  
NPS: U.S. National Park Service  
NRC: National Research Council  
NREPP: National Registry of Evidence -based Programs and Practices  
NRO: National Reconnaissance Office  
NSDUH: National Survey on Drug Use and Health  
NSS: National Seizure System  
NTBI: National Prescription Drug Take Back Initiative  
NHTSA: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  
OCDETF: Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces  
ODMAP: Overdose Map Detection Program  
OIG: Office of Inspector General  
OJJDP: Office of Juvenile Justice  and Delinquency Prevention  
OJP: Office of Justice Programs  
ONDCP: Office of National Drug Control Policy  
ORS: Overdose Response Strategy  
OTP: opioid treatment program  
OUD: opioid use disorder  
PHA: Public Health Analyst  
PRC: People's Republic of China  
PRSS: peer recovery support services  
 
1 The FY2023 Budget proposes to change the name of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism to 
the National Institute on Alcohol Effects and Alcohol -Associated Disorders, the name of the National Institute on 
Drug Abuse to the National Institute on Drugs and Addiction, and the name of the Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration  to the Substance use A nd Mental Health Services Administration . 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  4 PWUD: people who use drugs  
RCC: recovery community center  
RCO: recovery community organization  
SAMHSA: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration1 
SAPs: Student Assistance Programs  
SAPT: Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment  
SBHCs: school -based health centers  
SCM: specialized case management  
SDOH: Social determinants of health  
SSP: Syringe Services Program  
SUD: Substance Use Disorder  
TCO: Transnational Criminal Organization  
TEDS: Treatment Episode Data Set  
TTHY: Talk. They Hear You.  
UCR: Uniform Crime Reporting/ Uniform Crime Reports  
UNODC: United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime  
USAID: United States Agency for International Development  
USDA: United States Department of Agriculture  
USFS: United States Forest Service  
USFWS: United States Fish and Wildlife Service  
USPIS: United States Postal Inspection Service  
USSC: United States Sentencing Commission  
VA: United States Department of Veterans Affair s 
VHA: Veterans Health Administration  
WBE: wastewater -based epidemiology  
WONDER: Wide -ranging Online Data for Epidemiologic Research  
YRBS: Youth Risk Behavior Survey  
 
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  5 
To the Congress of the United States: 
I am pleased to transmit the 2022 National Drug Control Strategy . This inaugural Strategy  
proposes bold, targeted, and consequential actions to bend the curve on overdose deaths in the 
immediate term and reduce drug use and its damaging consequences over the longer term. These 
actions are based on the best science, evidence, and data available.  Through them, we  strive to 
usher in a new era of drug policy centered on individuals and communities.  
This Strategy  is the product of a rigorous process led by the Office of National Drug Control 
Policy in close collaboration with the 18 National Drug Control Agencies. In developing this 
Strategy , my Administration sought the input of more than 2,000 leaders and stakeholders 
including the entirety of the Congress; all 50 Governors; and advocates representing public 
safety, public health, community groups, local governments, and Tribal communities.  
In my State of the Union Address, I identified  addressing the opioid epidemic as part of a unity 
agenda for the Nation – something that could bring Americans together in service of a goal we 
all share. As this Strategy  lays out, there is so much more we can do to expand access to 
evidence-based prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery services, while also working 
to reduce the supply of harmful drugs in our communities.  
I look forward to working with the Congress as well as S tate, local, and T ribal leaders as we 
implement this Strategy. Together, we can create safer and healthier communities for everyone.  
 
 
   
President Joseph R. Biden 
 
The White House  
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  6 Preface from  Dr. Gupta, Director 
The overdose epidemic affects  all Americans,  and in  his first State of the  Union, President Biden 
called  on all  Americans  to work together  to address it as  part of a unity agenda for the  Nation.  As 
the President said,  “Let’s beat the opioid epidemic.” 
This call to action  comes  at a critical  moment.  For the first time in  our Nation’s history we  have 
passed  the tragic milestone of 100,000 deaths  resulting  from drug overdoses in  a 12-month 
period. S ince 1999, drug overdoses have killed  approximately 1 million  Americans.  These are 
sons and daughters, parents and grandparents, neighbors and friends, and classmates and 
coworkers. This  level  of loss is  heartbreaking and frankly, unacceptable.  As we continue to  lose 
an American  life to drug overdose every five  minutes  around the clock,  we find ourselves at  an 
inflection  point where we,  as a Nation,  must  commit ourselves to  doing what  we know will help  
us triumph over this crisis . 
As a practicing  physician, I have  seen  firsthand the barriers that  prevent people from obtaining 
the substance use  treatment  they  need. As  a researcher,  I have  observed the  pervasive biases  that 
have enabled  ineffective drug policy approaches to  be repeated  over  and over with  the same 
results.  And  as a policymaker,  I have encountered  the roadblocks to  progress in  our legal  and 
medical  systems . This is part of the reason why I have seen too many succumb to their disease. 
Too often, stigma hinders Americans from seeking and receiving the help they need.  
People with substance use disorder are in need of compassion and care. With the proper 
treatment and recovery support services, individuals go on to overcome addiction and lead successful lives.  
Every family in America, regardless of their background or beliefs, has been impacted by addiction in some way. This is the reality we are facing today.  The epidemic has taken a 
devastating toll on public health as well as the economy. Addiction prevents someone from reaching their full potential and contributing to their families and communities in a productive manner. Previous research has estimated that the economic costs of the epidemic are roughly $1 Trillion per year. If this trend continues, our national security and prosperity may be compromised considerably in the long -term.  
Because the destruction caused  by this  epidemic in recent years  is unrivaled, and the Biden-
Harris Administration  is determined  to take unprecedented  steps.  There is  a complex  interplay  
between  the availability  of drugs in  the United  States  and their  use. Our Strategy  will focus on 
two critical  drivers of the  overdose epidemic:  untreated  addiction  and drug trafficking profits.  
We are c
hanging how we  help  people when  it comes  to drug use,  by meeting  them  where they  
are with  high- impact  harm  reduction  services  and removing barriers to  effective treatment  for 
addiction, while addressing the  underlying factors that  lead  to substance use  disorder head  on. 
We are also striking  drug trafficking  organizations where it hurts them the most,  in their wallets,  
by disrupting the operating capital  they  need  to sustain  their  criminal  enterprise. We need  to 
apply both elements  of this  approach together, so  we can disrupt the  trafficking  of drugs into  the 
United  States  while allow ing our historic investments  in public health  interventions to  take hold. 
If it is  easier  to get illicit drugs in  America  than  it is to get treatment,  we will never bend  the 
curve. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  7 We can  change this.  We can make sure people get the help  they  need  while  also making  our 
communities  safer. President Biden’s inaugural National Drug  Control Strategy lays out our 
plans to  achieve just that.  It is based  on the  best science,  evidence,  and data available,  and strives  
to usher in  a new era  of drug policy centered  on individuals  and communities.   
As a Nation  we must  consider the legacy  we are leaving  behind for future generations.  When  it 
comes  to drug policy, the  Biden-Harris Administration  is determined  that our legacy  will be 
healthier  people and safer  communities.  This  means  building a better  addiction  infrastructure for 
preventing and treating  substance use  disorder, supporting recovery, and embracing  evidence-
based  harm reduction strategies  that keep  people alive.  This means  building a better  way of 
addressing addiction  in the criminal  justice system,  reducing crime and making our communities 
safer while also making  sure people get the help  they  need. And  this means  reducing the supply 
of illicit substances  entering our communities.  Every time one of our law enforcement 
professionals seizes  illicit fen tanyl, cocaine,  or methamphetamine,  they are helping  to save  lives  
and are cutting  into the profits of the criminal  organizations that fuel violence,  breed corruption, 
and destabilize our partner  nations, which makes our country and the world safer.  
Our mandate from President Biden is clear:  Reduce the number of drug overdose deaths,  put 
quality  public health  services  within  reach  for people with  substance use  disorder, and  stop  the 
drug trafficking  organizations that  seek  profits by harming Americans.  Working together,  we can 
build healthy, safe  and resilient communities  where we  have  reduced the adverse experiences  
that can  lead  to substance use  disorder, where  public health  services  are available to  everyone 
who needs them,  and where the  millions  of Americans  living in  recovery  have their health,  their 
home, their  community, and their  purpose in life.  
As President Biden said  in his State of the Union, “If you’re suffering from addiction,  you should 
know you’re not alone.  I believe in reco very, and I celebrate the  23 million  Americans  in 
recovery… Now is  our moment to  meet  and overcome the challenges  of our time together.  And  
we will. ” Our  work cannot wait  because every five minutes  is a chance to  save  and transform a 
life. 
 
                                                        
Dr. Rahul Gupta 
Director  of National Drug Control Policy   
  

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  8 Introduction: Saving Lives is  Our  North  Star 
The drug overdose epidemic has  taken  a heartbreaking toll on Americans  and their  families.  
Provisionally, in  the 12-months ending October 2021, an  historic 105,752 persons are predicted  
to have died  from a drug overdose; a 71-percent  increase over this time period in  2016.1 This  
was a greater  rate of increase than  for any other type of injury-related death  in the United  States.2 
Synthetic opioids, including illicit  fentanyl,  has been  involved in  66-percent of these  overdose 
deaths.  
Saving lives  is our North Star , and the 2022 National Drug  Control Strategy calls  for immediate 
actions  that will save  lives  in the short term  and outlines long-term  solutions to  reduce drug use  
and its  associated  harms, including overdose.  
The Biden-Harris Administration’s Drug  Policy Priorities 
for Year One 
The passage  and signature of the Substance  Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes  Opioid 
Recovery and Treatment  for Patients  and Communities  (SUPPORT)  Act in 2018 required the 
Office of National  Drug Control Policy  to produce a statement  of drug policy  priorities by April 
1 of the first year  of an  Administration  and an inaugural National Drug  Control Strategy  in the 
second year. 
President Biden understood the urgency of  the issue  when  he took office and the  Biden-Harris 
Administration  submitted its  first-year  drug policy  priorities  to Congress on April 1, 2021.  
These seven  priorities  proposed specific and  targeted  actions  to reduce overdoses and  promote 
recovery, including  expanding access  to quality  treatment,  reducing an  increasingly  lethal  supply 
of illicit substances,  and enhancing harm reduction  services  that engage and build trust with  
people who  use drugs, among others. 
The seven  Biden -Harris Administration  drug policy  priorities  for the first year  were:  
1. Expanding access  to evidence-based  treatment,  particularly  medication  for opioid use  
disorder.  
2. Advancing racial  equity in  our approach to  drug policy.  
3. Enhancing evidence-based  harm reduction efforts.  
4. Supporting evidence-based  prevention efforts to  reduce youth substance us e.  
5. Reducing the  supply of illicit substances.   
6. Advancing recovery-ready workplaces and  expanding the  addiction  workforce.  
7. Expanding access  to recovery support services.   
ONDCP  worked closely  with  agencies,  Congress, and other partners in  support of these  
priorities. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  9 Significant Actions Taken to Save Lives 
The Biden -Harris Administration has taken several actions that support the first-year  drug policy  
priorities: 
• President Biden signed  the American  Rescue Plan  into law,  which  invested  nearly  $4 
billion  in expanding access  to vital  mental  health  and substance use  disorder services.  
• The Department  of Health  and Human  Services  (HHS)  released  a new Overdose 
Prevention Strategy  that supports substance use  prevention  by expanding research  of new 
and improved prevention  efforts, investing  in community  resources to  help  prevent  harms 
related  to substance use,  increasing  access  to high-quality  pain  management to reduce 
preventable suffering, and promoting responsible prescription  of medications  to protect 
patient  safety.  
• The Administration  made it easier  for health  care providers to  prescribe buprenorphine to  
treat more patients  with  opioid use  disorder; Thousands of providers signed up to  do this 
within  a few months. 
• The Administration  also announced rulemaking intentions to extend pandemic related 
treatment flexibilities to  allow:  
• people with  opioid use  disorder to begin buprenorphine treatment by telehealth,  including 
through phone consultation; and 
• patients  receiving  methadone to  receive a higher amount of take-home e medication 
instead  of visiting  a clinic every day. 
• The DEA revised  regulations to  allow  treatment  providers to  operate mobile methadone 
vans, bringing treatment to  rural, incarcerated,  and underserved communities.  
• President Bide n announced  two Executive  Orders to  counter transnational  criminal  
organizations and illicit drug trafficking, first  by formally establishing  the U.S.  Council 
on Transnational  Organized  Crime,  and second, by modernizing and expanding the U.S. 
Government’s ability  to target  drug trafficking organizations, their  enablers, and financial  
facilitators  through sanctions and other  related  actions.  
These key actions represent a fraction of the  total.  For a comprehensive list,  visit White House 
Releases  List of Actions  Taken  by the Biden -Harris Administration  Since  January 2021 to  
Address Addiction  and the Overdose Epidemic | The White House .  
The Administration’s Inaugural  National Drug Control 
Strategy: A Comprehensive Path Forward 
The first-year  policy priorities  served as  the basis  for President Biden’s inaugural National Drug  
Control Strategy , which  builds upon the  significant actions  taken  during the Administration's 
first year  to reduce overdose deaths and improve the way  this Nation  approaches drug use  and its  
harms.  
Specifically,  this Strategy seeks  to build  the foundation for the Nation’s work to  reduce drug 
overdose deaths  by add ressing  both the  demand and supply sides  of drug policy. This  includes  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  10 building a stronger substance use  disorder treatment  infrastructure and reducing the supply of 
illicit  substances  through targeted  law enforcement  actions  and commercially disrupting criminal 
organizations by undermining the  illicit finance networks that make drug trafficking both 
possible and profitable. Additional top priorities  include expanding evidence-based  harm 
reduction strategies  to meet  people where they are, preventing  drug use  from beginning, building 
a recovery-ready Nation, addressing drug policy  challenges  in criminal  justice,  and improving 
data systems  and research  that guide drug policy  development.   
This Strategy  charts  a comprehensive p ath forward beyond what  past federal drug policies  have 
attempted.  The increased  focus on improving racial equity,  which  has been  a longstanding 
problem in  drug policy  affecting  both  public health and public safety , is long overdue. The new 
focus on evidence-based  harm  reduction  addresses a historic gap in past U.S.  drug policy. The  
renewed  focus on collaboration  across public health  and public safety  has implications  for every 
community  in the Nation.   
Each  chapter  of this  Strategy supports saving lives  with  specific principles  and action  items  for 
Federal agencies  and departments  to lead:  
Prevention and Early Intervention 
Adolescence is a critical  risk period for substance use  initiation  and adverse outcomes  related  to 
substance use,  particularly  as drug use  has been  found to  escalate between  ages 12 and  19.3 The 
goal of substance use  prevention  efforts is  to prevent and/or delay  the first use  of substances.  
Research  shows that early age of onset is an important predictor  for the development  of a 
substance use  disorder later  in life.4,5 Further, research  shows that prevention interventions can  
have positive long-term  effects  in reducing substance use.6,7 Recognizing that preventing or 
delaying  initiation  of substance use  can confer important health  and social  benefits,  the Biden-
Harris Administration  is focused on addressing the social  factors  that put some  youth at  
increased  risk for substance use,  preventing use  before it starts,  and avoiding the escalation  of 
use during the most  critical  period for substance use  initiation.  
Harm  Reduction  
Harm  reduction is  an approach that emphasizes  working directly  
with people who  use drugs to  prevent overdose and infectious 
disease transmission, improve the physical, mental,  and social  
wellbeing  of those served, and offer flexible options for 
accessing  substance use  disorder treatment  and other health  care  
services.  In other words, harm  reduction is  people-centered. It 
means  helping  people who  use drugs access  services  they  need  to 
stay alive.  It means  building trust with  them  so that when  they  
wish  to seek  help, they  know where to  turn.  
Specifically,  t he Biden -Harris Administration’s  focus on harm reduction  includes  naloxone, drug 
test strips,  and syringe services  programs. Syringe services programs are community -based 
programs that can provide a range of services, including links to substance use disorder 
treatment; access to and disposal of sterile syringes and injection equipment; and vaccination, testing, and links to care and treatment for infectious diseases. Syringe services programs can be a critical intervention to reduce overdose deaths and communicable disease. Access  to these Focus Area:  Expanding 
access to naloxone, an 
opioid overdose reversal 
medication, which could 
save tens of thousands of 
lives in a short period  
of time.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  11 proven, lifesaving  interventions8 should not depend on where someone lives  and instead  should 
be available to  all who  need  them.  The types  of interventions  proposed in  this Strategy will save  
lives,  improve health,  and likely  have  a favorable economic benefit  to society.  
Substance  Use Disorder Treatment  
According to  the 2020 National  Survey on Drug Use  and Health  (NSDUH),  nearly  all of the 
almost  20 million  people living  in the United  States  who  need  treatment  are not currently  
receiving  addiction treatment  services.9 People with  SUD face prejudice,  stigma,  and 
discrimination,  and this  may  especially  be true for Black  individuals  seeking treatment.10 
Stigmatizing  attitudes  towards drug use  and people who  use drugs exist  throughout our  society,  
including in health  care.11 It is vital  that the Nation  reduces the 
barriers to  substance use  treatment  so everyone who  needs it can  
access  it. Similarly,  important is  building a system  of care that 
proactively  seeks,  diagnoses, and treats  those  who  need  it rather 
than waiting  until they  interact  with  the criminal  justice system  or 
experience an overdose. Treatment  works and tens of millions of 
people in  this country are in recovery.12 However, additional work 
is necessary  to meet  the Strategy’s stated  treatment  goals of 
increasing  access  to quality  treatment,  reducing  stigma,  ensuring 
dedicated  interventions  for the  most  vulnerable, and building a 
trained  addiction  workforce.  
Building  a Recovery- Ready  Nation  
The four major  dimensions of recovery prioritized in  the Strategy are  home, health,  purpose, and 
community.13 Recovery is measured  as a positive—by what  it brings, including  quality  of life,  a 
sense  of self -efficacy  and purpose, and improvements in  social  and emotional  functioning and 
wellbeing.  Americans  follow diverse trajectories  from SUD to  recovery or remission.  In 2020, an  
estimated  29.2 million  Americans perceived  ever  having a substance use  problem.14 Of these,  21 
million  (72-percent) identified  as in recovery or recovered  from a substance use  problem.15 A 
2017 study found that,  among people who  reported having resolved  an alcohol or other  drug 
program, the most  common recovery supports included  mutual aid  groups (45-percent), 
treatment  (28-percent), and emerging  recovery support services  (22-percent).16 Reaching  
recovery is  more  important than  the specific path  taken  to it.  
The Administration  will work to  increase scientific understanding of recovery, foster adoption of 
more consistent  certification  and accreditation  standards nationally, expand the  peer  recovery 
support services  (PRSS)  workforce and the  organizational  infrastructure that  supports it,  address 
stigma and misunderstanding, and eliminate barriers to  safe and supportive housing, 
employment,  and education  for people in recovery. 
Domestic  Supply  Reduction   
Law enforcement agencies  at all levels —federal,  state,  local,  Tribal,  and territorial —work to  
combat domestic cultivated  and synthetic drug production and trafficking  with  the goal  of 
protecting Americans  from a lethal  drug supply contributing to  record levels  of fatal  drug 
overdoses. Ho wever, traffickers continue to  refine their  methods and adopt new techniques  of 
distributing drugs throughout our communities.   Focus Area: 
Expanding access to 
high-quality treatment, 
including medications 
for opioid use disorder 
(MOUD), to prevent 
overdoses and put 
recovery within reach.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  12 Responding effectively  to the illicit production, trafficking,  and distribution methods of domestic 
criminal  organizations and Transnational Criminal Organizations (TCOs) is  a significant  
challenge and remains  a Biden -Harris Administration  priority. Four principal lines  of effort are  
necessary  to improve domestic collaboration, reduce the  supply of illicit substances,  and 
decrease the harms  caused  by these substances in  the United  States  and abroad: 
• Improve information sharing and cooperation across all levels  of government to  
strengthen the  domestic response to  drug trafficking; 
• Deny  and disrupt domestic production, trafficking, and distribution of illicit  substances;  
• Improve assessments  of supply reduction  initiative effectiveness  and efficiency  and 
allocate resources accordingly; and 
• Protect  individuals and the environment at home from criminal  exploitation  by those 
associated  with  drug production and trafficking. 
International Supply  Reduction  
The majority  of illicit drugs consumed in the United  States  are 
produced abroad by TCOs  and smuggled into the country. Large 
TCOs,  wherever they  are based, threaten  the health  and safety  of 
our communities  by exposing our citizens  to illicitly  
manufactured substances.  These include synthetic drugs, such  as 
opioids like fentanyl  and stimulants  like methamphetamine,  and 
cultivated  drugs like  heroin and cocaine.  The plentiful  supply and 
widespread  availability  of high potency  illicit  drugs fuel drug 
consumption across all sectors of American  society.   
Large and influential TCOs  pose a threat  to national security  and effectively  responding to  their  
illicit  manufacturing, trafficking  and distribution methods is  an Administration  priority. 
Countering corruption and its deleterious impact,  including  its role in  facilitating  transnational 
crime,  is a core  national security  interest  of the U.S.  government.  
The U.S.  must  strengthen international partnerships and foster bilateral exchanges  to 
collaboratively  address drug-related  problems as  a shared responsibility.  The increasingly 
dynamic and complex  nature of the international  illicit drug trade demands  enhanced  cooperation 
with international partners that  reflects  the reality  of a globalized  supply chain  for illicit  drugs 
and their  precursor chemicals.  In addition  to confronting TCOs’  illicit  drug manufacturing and 
trafficking  activities  directly,  the U.S.  must  also pursue the financial  enablers  of this  illicit  
activity  to deny  TCOs  their  ill-gotten  proceeds and to  disrupt their ability  to transfer working 
capital  to fund their range of illicit activities  including procuring precursor ingredients,  
trafficking, bribery, and corruption. A global approach is  essential  since traffickers  exploit 
national boundaries to  insulate their operations and limit  the impact of any single nation’s control 
efforts.17 
Criminal Justice  and Public  Safety  
Americans with undiagnosed or untreated substance use disorders too often end up interacting 
with the justice system, creating severe consequences for individuals, their families and communities, society, and taxpayers.  Further, attaching criminal penalties to substance use alone Focus Area: Disrupting 
illicit finance networks to 
commercially disrupt 
drug trafficking 
operations and prevent 
illicit substance from 
reaching communities in 
the United States.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  13 has contributed to lost lives, hope and opportunity. Untreated substance use disorder is 
overrepresented in the prison population; A study published in  2010 estimated  that 65-percent of 
persons incarcerated  had an  active SUD.18 The impact  begins at  arrest and continues through 
incarceration  and after release back  into the community.  Arrest and incarceration  for crimes  
related  to substance use  and possession  disproportionately affect Black,  Indigenous and People 
of Color (BIPOC) communities.  According to  an analysis  of National  Registry data  through mid -
October  of 2016, African Americans  may  be nearly  five times  as likely  to go to  prison for drug 
possession  as Whites,  and data  on exoneration outcomes  suggest innocent Black  people  are about 
12 times  more  likely  to be convicted of drug crimes  than  innocent W hite people.19  
The arrest and incarceration  of people who  use drugs (PWUD) has not only led  to significant 
harms in  BIPOC communities,  but it increases  risks of overdose as  well.  Upon release,  
incarcerated  individuals are at a meaningfully elevated risk to die  from an overdose than  the 
general population.20,21 It is clear  that the criminal  justice system  must  play  an important role in  
ensuring that people within  its custody or supervision and upon reentry  who  use drugs do not 
overdose and instead  have  access  to the continuum of services  and support.  
Data  and Research  
The Biden-Harris  Administration  is committed  to employing  a multi-faceted  and evidence-based  
approach to  policy -making  as directed  in the Presidential  Memorandum on scientific  integrity  
and evidence-based  policymaking. 22 This  is particularly  significant in the area of drug policy  
where the ultimate  impact  is typically  measured  in American  lives.  Timely  and accurate data  are 
essential to grasp the extent and evolving nature of the  drug 
problem, guide policy, assess the effectiveness  of our nation’s 
efforts, and continually improve these efforts over time.  Data 
systems  and research  to generate this  information  must  be 
maintained,  enhanced,  and supplemented  so drug control 
practitioners,  researchers,  and policy-makers  are continually 
informed by the  most  up to  date and accurate information, while 
also protecting privacy  and confidentiality.  Further, when  well  
communicated,  such  data  can help  inform the American  public as 
to the types  of policies  and programs most  likely  to successfully  
address substance use  challenges  in their  own  communities.   
Considering the co sts of drug use  to society, which  have vastly  increased  due to the opioid 
epidemic over the past  decade,  our data  systems  lack  the timeliness,  scope and precision required 
for the most  impactful national response. As we assess the data and research  landscape to  address 
the Administration’s  commitment  to implementing  evidence-based  drug policy, we  have much  
more work to  do to  close  information and knowledge gaps. This  chapter  focuses on three themes: 
strengthening existing  data systems,  establishing  new data systems and analytical methods to  fill 
gaps, and enhancing the  utility  of drug data  for policymakers,  program developers and  
administrators,  practitioners, and researchers.  It concludes  with  recommendations for sustaining  
data systems  and research  to inform drug control policy. Focus Area: Improving 
data collection, 
particularly for non-fatal 
overdoses, to obtain a full 
picture of overdoses in 
America and identify 
people who need 
substance use treatment.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  14 Specific Goals and Measuring Federal  Performance  
Accountability  is critical  to success.  With  a Federal  Drug Control  Budget  of $40 billion, it  is 
vital to the national  interest  that the Strategy’s  policies  and plans  are evaluated  as they  progress. 
To evaluate the effectiveness  of the  Nation’s  drug  policy efforts,  and assess  the progress  in 
implementing  the Strategy, the Biden -Harris  Administration  established  seven  goals  to be 
achieved  by 2025. These goals, measured  against  a baseline of 2020, across  the gamut  of drug 
policy  issues,  including a  general  goal  to reduce  illicit  substance use  and enhance public health 
and safety , as well  as other  specific public  health  and supply reduction  issues.  Each  of these long-
range, comprehensive  goals is accompanied  by quantifiable and measurable  objectives,  with 
specific  annual  targets . Please refer to the National  Drug  Control  Strategy:  Performance Review  
System  (PRS) Report  for a  detailed  discussion  of these goals, objectives  and targets.   
The following are the specific strategic goals  and objectives  for the  Nation  to reduce  the demand 
for and availability  of illicit  drugs  and their  consequences:  
1. Illicit substance use is reduced in the United States.  
o Objective 1:  The number of drug overdose  deaths  is reduced by 13-percent by 
2025. 
o Objective 2:  The percentage of people meeting criteria for each of cocaine, 
opioid, and/or methamphetamine use disorders are reduced by 25-percent  by 
2025.  
2. Prevention efforts are increased in the United States.  
o Objective 1:  Past  30-day  alcohol  use among  young people  aged  12-17 is  reduced  
by 10-percent  by 2025.  
o Objective 2: Past  30-day  use of any vaping  among youth aged  12-17 is  reduced  by 
15-percent  by 2025.  
3. Harm Reduction efforts are increased in the United States.  
o Objective 1:  The number of counties with high overdose death rates which have at 
least one Syringe Service Program (SSP) is increased by 85-percent by 2025.  
o Objective 2:  The percentage of SSPs that  offer some  type  of drug safety  checking  
support  service,  including, but  not limited  to Fentanyl  Test Strips,  is increased  by 
25-percent  by 2025.  
4. Treatment efforts are increased in the United States.   
o Objective 1:  Treatment  admissions  for the  populations  most  at risk of overdose  
death  is increased  by 100-percent  by 2025. 
o Objective 2:  The projected shortfall  in the qualified  workforce  of behavioral  
health  providers  (including addiction  professionals) funded by federal  programs  
in the United  States  is reduced by 70-percent  by 2025.  
5. Recovery efforts are increased in the United States.  
o Objective 1:  The number of states  operating a  recovery-ready workplace  initiative 
is increased  75-percent  by 2025.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  15 o Objective 2:  The number of peer- led recovery community organizations is 
increased by 25-percent by 2025.  
o Objective 3:  The number of recovery high schools is increased by 10-percent by 
2025. 
o Objective 4:  The number of collegiate recovery programs is increased by 25-
percent by 2025.  
o Objective 5:  The n umber  of certified  recovery residences  is increased  by 25-
percent  by 2025.  
6. Criminal Justice reform and public safety efforts in the United States include drug 
policy matters.  
o Objective 1:  Eighty  percent  of all  treatment  courts  will be trained  and will  
implement  practices  to increase equity  by 2025. 
o Objective 2:  The percentage of Federal  Bureau of Prisons  (BOP) inmates  
diagnosed with  an opioid use  disorder who  are given access  to medications  for 
opioid use  disorders  (MOUD)  is increased  to 100-percent  by 2025;  the percentage 
of both state prison progra ms and local  jail facilities  offering MOUD is  increased  
by 50-percent.  
7. The supply of illicit substances into the United States is reduced.  
o Objective 1:  The number of targets  identified  in counternarcotics  Executive 
Orders  and related  asset  freezes  and seizures  made by law  enforcement  is 
increased  by 365-percent  by 2025.  
o Objective 2:  The number of defendants convicted in active OCDETF  
investigations  that incorporate  FinCEN/SAR  data is  increased  by 14-percent  by 
2025. 
o Objective 3:  The percentage of active priority OCDETF investigations linked to  
the Sinaloa or Jalisco  New Generation  (CJNG)  cartels,  or their  enablers  (such as  
illicit  financiers)  disrupted or dismantled  is increased  by 25-percent  by 2025.  
o Objective 4:  Potential  production of cocaine is  decreased  by 10-percent,  and 
heroin is  decreased  by 30-percent  by 2025. 
o Objective 5:  The number of incident  reports  for precursor chemicals  sourced from  
China  or India  reported by North American  countries  increases  by 125-percent  by 
2025. 
Consultation for the National Drug Control Strategy  
The Office  of National  Drug Control  Policy  is statutorily  required to  consult  with  and solicit  
input  for the  National  Drug  Control  Strategy  from  a variety  of parties  affected  by federal  drug 
policy, including  federal  agencies  and departments  charged  with  carrying out  these policies,  
members  of Congress  and congressional  committees,  states,  local,  Tribal, and territorial  
governments, nongovernmental  organizations  and community  activists,  and foreign 
governments, among others.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  16 The consultation  process  for the  2022 National  Drug  Control  Strategy  began  in May  2021 and 
ONDCP  received  significant  input  from  a wide  range  of interested  parties.  While the COVID-19 
pandemic  prevented  in-person consultation  in communities  across  the Nation  as was done  in 
years  past,  ONDCP  held  virtual  meetings  and received  written  input  from the individual National 
Drug Control Program agencies while developing this Strategy . Following publica tion, ONDCP 
will lead the interagency process to implement this Strategy . Thank you to  all partners  who  
provided input  for the Biden -Harris  Administration’s  inaugural  Strategy,  and thank  you for your 
commitment  to addressing addiction  and the  overdose  epidemic.   
*** 
Addiction  and the overdose  epidemic are  urgent  issues facing  the Nation. Our  country has  never 
seen substance  use disorder cause such  devastation,  and the  Biden -Harris  Administration  is 
determined  to stop  it. An overdose  is a cry for help  and for too many  people  that cry goes 
unanswered. With  this National  Drug  Control  Strategy,  the Biden -Harris  Administration  is 
working to  ensure  these cries  are not just heard but  answered  as well.  This vision for  the United  
States’  drug policy is  based  on science,  evidence,  and the  best data  available.  Saving  lives  is our 
North Star,  and this  Strategy  supports  this goal on every page.   
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  17 Prevention  and Early Intervention  
Adolescence is a critical  risk period for substance use  initiation  and adverse  outcomes  related  to 
substance  use. Data from  the National  Survey on Drug Use  and Health  (NSDUH)  show  a rapid 
escalation  of drug use  
associated with an increase in 
age, particularly among youth ages 12-19 (see Figure to  
left).
23 This trajectory  speaks  
to the need  to understand what  
drives  youth drug use,  identify  
current  and emerging trends, 
and match  programs  and 
policies  with local conditions 
so as to effectively reduce youth substance use.  
There  are simultaneous  
conditions  that converge  to 
create a  particularly  dangerous  
circumstance for adolescents  – 
drug use  increases  during a  
period of time when  the brain 
is especially  vulnerable to  
damage from  drug use.
24 During adoles cence there  is a significant  reorganization  of brain  
regions  necessary  for intellectual  function,  memory, emotional  regulation , and decision-
making.25,26 Drug use  often disrupts  normal  brain  development  and can result  in long- lasting  
negative consequences,  including  reduced  academic achievement  and increased  risk of 
depression, anxiety, suicide, and substance  use disorder (SUD) later  in life. 27,28,29,30,31 
Adolescent d rug use  can also cause persistent changes in brain32 structure and function.33 
A range  of factors  influence mental,  emotional,  and behavioral  development in  children  and 
adolescents.34 These include  societal,  environmental,  familial,  and genetic dynamics.  Social  
determinants  of health  (SDOH) play  a critical  role in overall  health  status35 and substance  use, 
including opioid use.36 The Department  of Health  and Human  Services  (HHS)  describes  SDOH 
as the conditions  in which  people  are born, grow, live,  work and age,  all of which  affect  a wide  
range  of health  risks  and outcomes.37 Prevention initiatives, couples with social needs 
interventions, can be impactful across the lifespan, including and in particular for the prenatal period and throughout adulthood.  
More  generally, social  determinants  include factors  such  as food and hous ing security, access  to 
services  and supports , income,  lack of transporation, stable employment,  education,  and social  
inclusion. Studies  suggest  that roughly 30- percent  to 55-percent  of health  outcomes  are driven by 
SDOH,
38 and experiencing  these social  factors  may  increase levels  of stress experienced  which  
can elevate the  risk of substance  use.39 Peers  are often identified  as an influence to youth 
substance  use, but SDOH also contribute  to youth substance  use trends  and negative health  
outcomes  associated  with  substance  use. Parental  influence  can deter  youth use  or 
unintentionally enable youth use. For example, strong parental  monitoring, and communicating 

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  18 clear expectations about risk and positive role modeling, can reduce use in youth . Conversely, 
parents can unintentionally enable underage alcohol use and/or youth drug use by not securing 
alcohol and prescription drugs.40,41 Unstable housing is  associated  with  higher rates  of substance 
use among youth, while  some  families  and caregivers who  receive income supplements see  a 
significant  decrease in adolescent  substance use.42,43,44 Addressing SD OH is  necessary  to help 
improve health  and reduce inequities  in health  outcomes—including  in youth substance use,  and 
this effort will  require all  sectors of Government and society  to identify  and improve factors that  
influence health  outcomes.   
Another factor  to consider  in understanding the origins of substance use  among youth is  the 
impact  of adverse childhood e xperiences  (ACEs), their  connection to SDOH, and equity. ACEs  
are potentially  traumatic events  that occur  during childhood and adolescence (between  the ages  
of 0-17 years). Large scale population based studies have shown that individuals with more ACEs are likely to have health problems later in life. Types of ACEs include abuse and neglect,  
experiencing  or witnessing  violence,  experiencing divorce of parents,  a family  member  in jail, 
parental mental health or SUD,  having a family  member  or caregiver attempt or die by suicide,  
and chronic poverty.
45,46,47 Recently,  researchers have included  experiences with  racism,  
bullying, and community  violence as  traumatic experiences  that can impact  health  and 
wellbeing.48  While nearly  61 percent  of adults  surveyed report they experienced  at least  one 
type of ACE,  women  and most  racial  minority  groups were  more likely  to have  experienced  four 
or more ACEs.   
The link between  ACEs  and illicit substance use  has been  identified  in a number of studies.49,50 
The more ACEs  a child  experiences,  the more likely  the child  is to d develop a chronic disease, 
poor academic achievement,  and/or illicit substance use.51 Compared with  people with  no ACEs,  
individuals with  more than five ACEs  were  seven  to ten times  more  likely  to report problems 
with illicit  drug use.52,53 It is possible to  prevent youth exposure to ACEs,  and to  reduce the 
harms associated  with  ACEs  among individuals who  have already  experienced  them.54 A 
coordinated effort to  address SD OH will improve individual and population health,  advance 
health  equity, and decrease youth exposure to  ACEs. 
The goal of substance use  prevention efforts is  to prevent and/or delay  the first use  of substances.  
Research  shows that early age of onset is an important predictor  for the development  of SUD 
later in life.55,56 Research  also indicates  that the majority  of individuals who  have SUD started  
using substances  before age 18 and are relatively  more likely  to have  developed  SUD by age 
20.57 The age of onset is therefore an  important predictor  
for the development of SUD later in life.58,59,60 Youth 
substance use  is also often accompanied  by other factors 
such as low academic attainment,  health -related  issues 
(including a mental  health  diagnosis and risky sexual 
behavior), involvement with  the juvenile justice system,  
and overdoses. Youth who  engaged in drug use  are more 
likely  to experience violence,  are at greater  risk for mental 
illness and suicid al ideation and/or suicide , and more 
likely  to engage in  risky sexual behavior such  as not using 
a condom and having multiple partners.61 These  health  
behaviors put youth at risk for sexually  transmitted  
infections like HIV,  and unintended  pregnancy. Youth DFC & Youth Vaping  
Approximately three quarters of 
Drug-F ree Communities (DFC) 
Support Program coalitions  are 
engaged in  activities  to address 
vaping. Of  those coalitions,  94-
percent reported addressing 
nicotine/tobacco  and 84-percent  
reported addressing marijuana.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  19 engaging in  substance use  and sexual behavior at an  early  age are also  linked  to poor test  scores 
and lower  educational attainment.62,63  
Alcohol, marijuana,  and tobacco  are the substances  most  commonly  used  by adolescents.64 In 
2019, almost  14-percent  of high school students reported binge drinking within  the past month. 
Seven - percent reported past  month prescription  opioid misuse65—most  often drugs that were not 
prescribed to them .66 In 2020, one in  five high  school students surveyed reported past  month e-
cigarette use.  From 2017 to  2019, the  percentage of eighth  graders who  said they  vaped nicotine 
in the past  12 months roughly doubled from 7.5-percent  to 16.5-percent.67 Among lifetime use  
measures  from 2009 to  2019, marijuana use  was reported by 36.8-percent of high  school students 
surveyed, followed by misuse  of prescription opioids (14.3-percent)  and use  of synthetic 
marijuana (7.3-percent).  The prevalence of  youth use  of cocaine (3.9-percent),  methamphetamine 
(2.1-percent), or heroin (1.8-percent)  is much  smaller  and they  are not commonly  drugs of first 
use.  
In 2020, there were  783 opioid overdose deaths  in youth 5-18 year s old and 1,022 overdose 
deaths  involving all  drugs in  youth 5-18 year s old.68 Between  2016-2019, suspected  overdoses 
involving all  drugs increased  by 2-percent  for youth between  the ages of 0-10 years and a 2.3-
percent for youth between  the ages  of 11-14 years. Delaying  age of initiation  and addressing 
SUDs  from a life stage perspective with  assessment  and treatment  approaches incorporating co -
occurring disorders are necessary  
to successfully  impact overall  
health.69 There is a strong 
relationship between ACEs and 
early initiation of youth substance 
use.70 The estimated nonmedical 
use of prescription drugs increases 
by 62% for each additional 
ACE .71,72  
 Prevention interventions  can have 
positive long- term effects  in 
reducing substance use.73,74 While 
alcohol remains the primary 
substance of abuse for youth, rates of use have decreased substantially over time. Successful  
youth substance use  prevention 
works by targeting  at least  two 
areas  of the childhood experience: 
reducing risk  factors that  increase 
the likelihood  of substance use,  
and enhancing protective factors that prevent or decrease the impact  
of a negative experience.
75 
Universal prevention focuses on an entire population (e.g., school 
or community) and are  not Universal Prevention Interventions and Positive 
Impacts Across Generations  
A study looked at the impact on the offspring of 
children who received a universal prevention 
intervention. The original prevention intervention was 
implemented in public elementary schools serving high-
crime areas in Seattle, Washington. The initial Raising 
Healthy Children intervention provided social and 
emotional training to some children while others did not 
receive the training.  A recent analysis found that the 
intervention not only helped the children who received 
the initial social and emotional skills training, but their 
children benefited as well.  These offspring had less 
substance use, fewer behavior issues, and better 
academic skills than the children whose parents had not 
received the training.   
The persistent impact of these positive effects of the 
universal prevention intervention speaks to the potential 
to prevent adverse childhood experiences and counter 
the impact and of negative social determinants of health.  
Reference: Hill K, Bailey J, Steeger C, et al. Outcomes of 
Childhood Preventive Intervention Across 2 Generations - A 
Nonrandomized Controlled Trial.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  20 directed  at a specific risk  group.76 There  is evidence  that universal  prevention interventions  
provide  sustained  positive  impacts  on general  health  and behavioral  outcomes  years  after the end 
of the  intervention, including for youth in  disadvantaged  environments.77,78,79,80 A recent  
analysis  of the  Raising  Healthy  Children intervention indicated  positive outcomes  including  less 
substance  use, fewer  behavioral  issues,  and better  academic skills  into the third generation.81  
Early  childhood interventions  that enhance  protective  factors, such  as fostering self -control  and 
successful  coping strategies,  and minimize risk  factors  can bring persistent  benefits.82,83 For 
example,  a family  history of substance  use increases  a child’s  risk for substance  use but nurturing 
that child  in an environment  with  clear  messaging  that substance  use is potentially  harmful, and 
helping the child  spend time with peers  who do not  use substances  can offset  the original  
risk.84,85 In addition, prevention interventions  that are universal  (e.g., target  populations  
regardless  of risk  or use  status)  can reduce  prescription drug misuse  and have  positive  effects  on 
other health  risk behaviors, including  misuse of prescription drugs  to include opioid  
medications .86,87 When  interventions  are appropriately matched  to address  identified  problems, 
they can reduce  substance  use, reduce  the impact  of ACEs,  and counter the  potential  impact  of 
SDOH.88,89,90 
Prevention is  not only  effective, it  is also cost effective approach to  prevent  later  SUD have been  
identified  as an underutilized  response  to the opioid crisis.91 The 2016 Surgeon General’s  Report  
on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health92 also noted that prevention science demonstrates  that effective 
prevention intervention s exist,  can markedly  reduce  substance use , and evidence-based  program s 
and policies  are underutilized. There are  multiple examples  of cost  effective prevention  
programs. For  example,  the average effective school -based  prevention  program  is estimated  to 
save $18 per dollar invested.93 There  are also cost-benefit  assessments  of individual  programs. 
Too Good for Drugs, a  school -based  prevention program  for students  in kindergarten through 
12th grade, was  designed to increase social  competencies  (e.g., develop  protective factors) and 
diminish  risk factors  associated  with  alcohol,  tobacco, and other  drug use.  It has a benefit -to-cost 
ratio of +  $8.74 and it  is estimated  that there  is a 94-percent  chance  that benefits  will exceed  
costs.94 Other  effective and cost-effective programs  include Botvin Life Skills95 which  has 
benefit -to-cost  ratio  of $13.49, and the  Good  Behavior Game  with  a benefit -to-cost ratio  of 
$62.80.96 
Implementing  evidence-based  policies,  environmental  strategies,  and programs  requires  an 
understanding of a  community’s  challenges  and knowing which  strategies  will effectively  
address  a community’s  specific challenges.  There  are three approaches  that help  communities  
identify  their local  substance  use problems, identify  the appropriate  evidence-based  interventions  
to address  their  unique  local  conditions, and  assess the  effectiveness  of the  intervention. These 
three  approaches  are Drug-Free  Communities  (DFC) Support  Program, Promoting School  
University  Community  Partnerships  to Enhance Resilience (PROSPER), and Communities  that 
Care  (CTC).97,98,99,100,101 All three  of these approaches  have  demonstrated  the ability  to reduce  
substance  use among youth year s after  the initial  intervention .  
Prevention works  best when  there is  an infrastructure  to support  it, for example,  approaches  used  
by DFC,  CTC, PROSPER  and the  presence  of community  norms  that create an  environment  that 
support  youth and allows  them  to thrive. Interventions  should cross  stages  of child  develop ment  
and levels  of prevention (e.g., universal,  selective,  indicated) . Addressing substance  use should 
parallel  approaches  as seen  in treating  other  health  conditions  such  as cancer  or heart  disease.  To 
effect  lasting  change  there should be  support  for a  wide  range  of efforts —from  promoting a  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  21 healthier  environment, healthier  living patterns, to  population screening, to  identifying 
individuals at  risk or with  early/treatable disease,  as well as those requiring more  intensive 
treatment,  recovery  support, and rescue approaches. 
Recognizing that  preventing or delaying  initiation  of substance use  can confer important  health  
and social  benefits,  the Biden -Harris Administration  is focused on addressing the social  factors  
that put some  youth at  increased  risk for substance use,  preventing use  before it starts,  and 
avoiding the  escalation  of use  during the most  critical  period for  substance use  initiation.  The 
following principles identify  specific prevention interventions  that can effectively  address youth 
substance use.  
Principle 1: Preventing Substance  Use Among School-Aged 
Children is Effective 
Delaying  the age  of initiation  for substance use, providing skills for children that build resilience, 
and addressing co -occurring substance use and mental health disorders are necessary  to 
successfully  improve overall  health  and social  outcomes  for school-aged  children.102 Investments  
in research  have  identified  effective strategies  to strengthen  the mental  and emotional  
development of young people to prevent initial  use. Ensuring that school- aged  children  have 
access  to universal prevention programs designed to prevent use  before it  starts , prevention 
services that focus on children at higher risk for use or those that have started using drugs, and 
when necessary provide referral to treatment and recovery support is esse ntial to support the 
health,  well -being, and futures of the Nation’s 74 million  children.   
A. Provide technical assistance and guidance to help K -12 schools increase the reach of 
and access to substance use prevention supports and services.  (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/ OJP; ED; HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA) 
Schools are uniquely positioned  to provide services  that promote student health  and 
optimal wellness  as well as decrease barriers to  learning.  A number of school systems are 
already  working to build syste ms that can help prevent youth initiation  of substance use, 
identify  children  at risk for use  or those who  are already  using, and, as needed, refer 
youth to  appropriate interventions and/or treatment,  and provide recovery support.  
Providing technical assistance to schools on evidence-based approaches and programs 
can dramatically expand the number of children provided access to effective prevention 
efforts. One key approach is establishing school-based Student Assistance Programs 
(SAPs),  whic h can play  a key role  in these  efforts. SAPs are flexible in that they can  
support a range of efforts tailored  to the unique demographics, socioeconomic challenges,  
and cultural context  of the students  they  serve. SAPs can  be structured  to address the 
specific needs of a school.  They can focus on ACEs,  or children  who  live in  poverty or 
who may  be homeless.  These programs also  support the teachers  and educational staff  by 
providing access  to trained  professionals to  address emotional and behavioral issues 
among the students.  Federal agencies  should increase efforts to  provide technical 
assistance to  schools on effective,  comprehensive approaches to  screen,  prevent, 
intervene,  and support recovery for substance use  in school-b ased settings,  including 
guidance on how to  establish,  expand, and continuously evaluate the  success of SAPs in  
schools.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  22 B. Provide technical assistance and guidance to organizations interested in establishing 
and expanding Student Assistance Programs to include evidence-based practices and available federal funding mechanisms.  (Agencies Involved: ED; HHS/SAMHSA) 
Enlist  federal  agencies  to provide  technical  expertise  regarding effective comprehensive 
approaches  to prevent  use before it starts ( universal prevention), prevent initiation of use 
among children with an elevated risk for use (selective prevention), prevent progression to SUD for children who have started to use drugs (indicated prevention), refer students to substance use treat ment as  deemed clinically appropriate, and provide support  for 
recovery from substance  use in school -based  settings . Federal agencies should also be 
actively engaged in providing guidance  on how  federal  funding can be used  to support  
SAPs.  These efforts  should include  expanding understanding of effective prevention  
programs  and approaches  for all  school -aged  children  with  a special  emphasis  on 
preventing initiation  with  universal  prevention  interventions. The  assistance should also 
include  information about  federal  funding mechanisms  that can support SAPs, provide 
examples of effective programs, as well as, strategies for practical, ongoing assessments.  
C. Expand research on effective screening approaches for school age children in health care settings and expand efforts to translate research findings into clinically and culturally appropriate tools.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; ED; HHS/CDC, CMS, 
HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA) 
To expand the use of clinically effective and culturally appropriate screening t ools 
expanded research is needed. The American  Academy  of Pediatrics  (AAP)  notes  that 
adolescents  are at the highest  risk compared  to any other  age group for experiencing  
health  issues related  to substance use,  and that the potential  benefits  of identifyin g 
substance  use and intervening  to reduce  or prevent  use are substantial.
103 Results  from  a 
2014 needs  assessment  conducted by the AAP  indicated  that only 23% of pediatricians 
used a validated  screening  tool, although 88% were screening  for substance  use. AAP 
also note d that  by using clinical  impressions  alone  there is a tendency to  focus  on late  
stage of signs  of use  and suggest ed that this is an area for practice improvement. AAP’s  
Substance  Use Screening  and Implementation  Guide  report ed that  pediatric providers  
tend to underestimate the prevalence of adolescent  substance use,  so it is important  for 
health  care providers  to discuss substance  use with  all patients.  
A key area for expanded research focuses on screening for adolescents aged 12 to 17. The  
US Preventive  Services  Task  Force  (USPSTF)  recommends screening for unhealthy drug 
use in adults 18 year or older. The data for the 12 to 17 age group is currently 
insufficient.104 NIDA’s  and NIAAA’s  research  on screening  for substance  use has been 
critical in identifying effective screening approaches for this age group.105 NIDA and 
NIAAA are supporting a range of research studies focused on adolescents including looking at: address ing teen  substance use  during primary care vis its, providing 
interventions for adolescents  with  substance use  undergoing oral  surgery, screening for 
stimulant use disorder in a primary care setting.  It’s important to note as well that 
screening  can lead  to treatment,  but also screening  can lead to more  enhanced prevention 
services  in school -based  settings.  Another area for additional research surrounds 
screening for ACEs and trauma. ACEs are known risk factors for health issues in a 
population but the accuracy of screening tools in predicting an individual’s risk for health 
problems later in life is an area worthy of further research.
106,107 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  23 Translating  research  findings  into clinically  effective and culturally  appropriate  tools  is 
also important. Several  federal  agencies  can play  a key role in ensuring that the 
investment  in research  will help  the Nation’s  youth. The  Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) through its knowledge, experience, and close 
relationships with State and local substance use organizations and go vernmental agencies 
is well placed to help in developing effective, appropriate screening tools.  The Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), through its Early  and Periodic Screening,  
Diagnostic and Treatment  benefit , can ensure that children who qualify for the benefit 
receive effective and culturally appropriate screening for substance use.  
The Health  Resources  and Services  Administration  (HRSA)  currently supports  3,257 
school -based  health  centers  and can serve an important role in reaching children and 
adolescents who live in underserved communities.108 The Department of Justice can 
ensure it provides effective and appropriate screening for substance use for youth in 
juvenile  justice settings.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), working 
in collaboration with the NIH and other federal agencies, can draw on its experience in developing and disseminating guidance to K -12 schools on childhood diseases to help 
schools implement effectiv e substance use screening that is appropriate for a school’s 
population. The Department of Education (ED) also has an important role to play in 
ensuring close collaboration between substance use prevention efforts and M ulti-tiered  
System  of Supports  (MTSS)  programs.   
Through these collective efforts t here is great  potential  to reach  millions  of children  in 
school s and in office -based  health  care settings .  
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  24 Right  Service,  Right  Time,  for the Right  Child:   
How  a Washington State  School District  Provided  
Comprehensive Behavioral Health Services for Students  
In 2012, the Capital Region Educational Service District 113 in Washington State faced a 
challenge with substance use and behavioral issues among high school students. Tenth grade 
current al cohol use rates for one identified district were at 36 -percent, compared to the state 
average of 23-percent according to the state’s Healthy Youth Survey. Additionally, problem 
behaviors and suspensions were at troubling levels, as were school attendance r ates. These 
problems were compounded by a lack of access to clinically appropriate treatment and recovery 
support services for youth. To respond, the district established a Student Assistance Program 
(SAP) in 2013. Under the SAP model, a trained and credentialed behavioral health professional 
was brought onsite and the entire school staff was engaged to identify and help prevent substance 
use and address behavioral challenges among students. This made the entire team responsible for 
the behavioral health of  the students.  Under the SAP, the spectrum of services available to 
students was expanded and included: prevention services, behavioral health screening and early 
intervention of youth at high risk of substance use or mental health issues, referral and care 
management to substance use and/or mental health treatment and comprehensive recovery 
support services. The program also engaged parents/caregivers and the community.   
The SAP’s comprehensive approach had overwhelmingly positive outcomes. From 2013 to 
2018, the comprehensive approach adopted under the SAP was associated with a reduction in 
past 30-day alcohol use from a peak of 36% in 2012 to just 10% in 2018. Comparatively, 
statewide alcohol use rates only changed from 25% to 18% in that same time frame.  But most 
compelling were the stories from the students themselves.  The students described how an adult at 
the school saw they were struggling and referred them to someone who could figure out what 
was going on, understand their unique situation, and could figure out how to help them in their 
unique situation. The adoption of the SAP philosophy created a school environment where an 
individual focus on the needs of each student was possible.  
Source: Data provided by Capital Region Educational Service Distri ct 113, Washington State.  
Principle 2: Preventing Substance Use Among Young Adults 
Promotes Overall Health  
Young adults  experience a different set  of risk factors specific to the developmental  challenges  
of transitioning  to adulthood.109 Coping skills  developed during early  adolescence to  reject  
substance use  may  no longer be  effective during this  transition  to adulthood. These challenges  
set the stage for a critical  time in  which  young adults  are likely  to initiate or increase substance 
use. 
Among young adults  between  the ages of 18-25 years, the number of past  year  initiates  of 
alcohol use  doubled from 1.2 million  people  in 2002 to  2.4 million  people in  2019. In  addition, 
national survey data  show higher prevalence rates  of illicit drug use  including  marijuana,  
amphetamine,  cocaine,  hallucinogens, and MDMA,  among young adults  in comparison  to youth 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  25 (ages 12-17 years) and adults  (26 years and  older). Further analysis  shows significantly  different 
rates  of substance use  among specific categories  of young adults,  including  those with  mental  
health  conditions, LGBTQ  youth, and collegiate vs non-collegiate young adults.  
Prevention efforts addressing the  needs of young adults  must  consider  that young adults  have 
their own  unique patterns  of substance use  behaviors, an  array  of social determinants  of these 
behaviors. This  age cohort requires prevention services  in multiple modalities  and settings  
including colleges  and universities,  workplaces, vocational  training  programs, military  services,  
homeless  and runaway programs, correctional facilities  (e.g., college health  centers,  primary care  
centers),  and general  health  care settings.   
A. Encourage mental health and substance use and misuse screening for young adults 
in health care setting s. (Agencies Involved: HHS/CMS, HRSA, SAMHSA)  
Providing information and technical assistance to health care providers, colleges and universities, employee assistance programs, and other providers that serve young adults 
can expand awareness and access to critical screening. The  Affordable Care  Act (AC A) 
required plans and issuers that  offer dependent child  coverage to make the coverage 
available until the adult child  reaches  the age of 26. In addition, ACA expanded coverage 
via expanded Medicaid  and the ACA marketplaces  for young adults  unable to  stay on 
their parents  plan. This expands coverage for many  young adults to  access  important  
screening, care,  and referral to  services.  Given  the high  prevalence of SUD  among young 
adults,  as well  as co-occurring mental illness,  it is important for health  professionals to: 
conduct regular  screenings  to identify substance use  and misuse; assess mental health  
disorder(s); and refer  individuals  to clinically  appropriate prevention and treatment  
interventions  in a timely  manner. HHS should assess its cur rent support for behavioral 
health screening and explore opportunities to expand its efforts.  
B. Educate newly licensed drivers on the risks and harms of substance use.  (Agencies 
Involved: DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, SAMHSA) 
Age requirements for obtaining a driver’s license differ from state to  state.  According  to 
the Governors Highway  Safety  Association,  most  states  grant full driver’s licensure 
between  the ages  of 16-18 years. This  graduated license process provides opportunities to  
disseminate information, tools, and resources to  teens  and young adults  about the harms 
of substance use.110 Partnerships between  state Departments  of Health  and Motor Vehicle 
Agencies  can ensure up to  date information about the risks  and harms of substance use  
are disseminated  to applicants  in preparation for licensure,  as well  as when  full driver’s 
licenses  are issued.  Federal  agencies  should encourage states  to leverage Substance 
Abuse Prevention and Treatment  Block Grant (SAPT)  funds to  partner with  the 
Department  of Motor Vehicles  to reach  a majority  of young adults with  information and 
messages  to prevent substance use.  
C. Encourage evidence-based employer -based wellness programs. (Agencies Involved: 
HHS/ACF, CDC, SAMHSA; Labor; Treasury/IRS)  
According to  the Department of Labor, a Drug-Free  Workplace program consist  of 
several  core  components:  written  policy; employee education; supervisor training; 
employee assistance program (EAP); and drug testing.  Although drug testing  receives  
significant  attention  in federal policy, employee education  and assistance are equally  
important.  Given  the unique patterns  of substance use  among the  young adult population, 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  26 tailoring  efforts to  address this  group’s substance use  and mental  health  needs is  
especially  important.  Wellness  programs offer tools to  foster healthy  nutrition, physical 
activity,  stress management,  lifestyle coaching, incentive programs, counseling, and a 
myriad  of other  services  to address risk  and resiliency  factors among employees.111 In 
addition  to outlining employer’s rules and expectations,  a program focused on nurturing 
employee wellness  can help  increase productivity, morale,  and overall safety  of the 
workplace. The  Society  for Hunan Resource Management provides guidance to 
employers on developing wellness  programs to  promote overall wellness.  SAMHSA also 
provides resources to assist employers in establishing Drug-Free Workplace programs. 
Federal agencies  should encourage public and private sector  employers  to adopt 
federally -funded workplace wellness  programs via on-line  classes  or expand wellness  
programs, especially  making  assertive efforts where young adults  enter  the workforce. 
SAMHSA’s Wellness Initiative highlights several dimensions of a multifaceted approach to improving overall wellness that can be integrated into workplace programs.
112 
Apprenticeship, fellowship,  and college intern ship programs have  particular  opportunities 
to target young adults for information and services  to prevent substance use  and promote 
health  and wellness .  
D. Raising awareness of substance use harms in the collegiate community. (Agencies Involved: ED; HHS/NIH, SAMHSA)  
Each  year, millions  of students  begin their collegiate journey away  from the routines and 
oversight of parents or caregivers . In addition  to promoting policies  to discourage 
underage drinking and tobacco  use, many  colleges  and universities incorporate 
information about the dangers of substance use  into student orientation.  Several  federal 
resources are ava ilable  to assist  colleges  and universities  in raising  awareness  among  
students. SAMHSA provides a resource guide to Substance Misuse Prevention for Young 
Adults with elements to guide initiatives to reach college-aged youth.113 Resources to  
support adoption of evidence-based campus  programs are available through the Higher  
Education  Center for Alcohol and Drug Misuse  Prevention and Recovery  (HECAOD)  
and NIAAA’s College Alcohol Intervention Matrix to  help  schools identify effective 
policies  and programs.114 Additionally,  college health  centers  can integrate screening for  
mental  health  and/or substance use  among college student populations and provide 
connections to  community -based  resources. HECAOD can  also provide guidance on 
strategies  for institutions  of higher education to  continually  evaluate their  programs over 
time,  and to  continually  make  refinements  to achieve increasingly  better  outcomes.  
Federal partners should assess evidence-based  programs and explore opportunities to  
expand reach  among the collegiate community.  
Principle 3: Preventing Youth Substance  Use Requires 
Community-Level Interventions 
Public health  strategies and interventions  aimed  at preventing and reducing youth substance use  
must  also addre ss the environmental conditions that can often facilitate and/or establish  
substance use  as normative behavior. Grounded in  public health  research,  the implementation  of 
environmental  prevention  strategies  that focus on the broader physical, social,  cultural,  and 
institutional  factors  that contribute to  local  substance use  are effective in  creating  positive 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  27 behavior change.  The section  that follows highlights opportunities across the federal government 
to strengthen evidence-based  efforts aimed  at addressing a wide  range of environmental and 
societal factors to  create healthy, safe,  and drug-free communities.  
A. Augment youth substance use prevention coalitions implementation of evidence-
based prevention strategies across the country. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, SAMHSA)  
Community coalitions,  such  as those funded and trained by the  Drug-Free  Communities 
(DFC) Support Program, are well  positioned to  address local  risk factors associated  with 
youth substance use  and strengthen  protective factors. Community  coalitions  are best 
suited  to establish  and strengthen  collaboration  among various sectors of their  
communities  to implement  a comprehensive mix  of evidence-based  prevention strategies  
that will  address their  local  needs.  By supporting the development of local  drug-free 
community  coalitions  and establishing  collaboration  among various sectors of a 
community, coalitions  are capable of achieving long-term  sustainable success  in 
preventing local  youth substance use.  The flexibility  and locally -driven nature of 
community  coalitions  allow  a range of successful  responses to  local  youth substance use 
issues. Federal agencies should highlight evidence-based youth substance use prevention 
programs and ensure federal funding opportunities require the implementation of 
evidence-based prevention strategies.    
B. Es tablish a community of practice (CoP) for evidence-based youth substance use 
prevention and adverse childhood experiences (ACEs).  (Agencies Involved: 
HHS/CDC, SAMHSA) 
Communities  of practice provide a collaborative framework for public health  
professionals to  work together  and gather  input and perspectives  from community  
partners  in an effort to identify  and leverage best  practices  and set  standards. Through 
these evolving collaborative efforts and sharing of lessons learned  in the community  
building process, the community  of practice approach is being implemented  in many  
public health  areas  as a model for how public health  partners  can be most  effective 
together. As  communities  seek  opportunities to  implement  data  driven prevention 
strategies  that focus on the broader physical, social,  cultural and institutional  factors  that 
contribute to  local  substance use,  a greater  focus on ACEs  provides youth within  these  
communities’  an environment that promotes their  overall  health  and safety.  Federal 
agencies should work towards the establishment of a CoP  for evidence-based  youth 
substance use  prevention and adverse childhood experiences and identify specific goals  
to be accomplished.  
C. Expand “Talk. They Hear You” to address youth alcohol use and other drugs, including marijuana.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; DOT/ NHTSA; ED; HHS/ACF, 
CDC, FDA, NIH, SAMHSA) 
SAMHSA’s “Talk.  They  Hear  You." (TTHY) Underage Drinking Prevention National 
Media Campaign  empowers parents  and caregivers to  talk with  children  early  about 
alcohol and other drug use.  High  rates  of youth alcohol use,  shifting state laws regarding 
marijuana,  and the nation’s overdose epidemic are prevalent health  concerns that  directly  
affect  America’s  parents  and caregivers.  Parents  have a significant influence in their  
children’s decision  to experiment  with  alcohol, tobacco, and other  drugs. The TTHY 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  28 campaign  aims  to accomplish  the following: Increase parents’  awareness  of the 
prevalence and risk  of underage drinking and substance use;  equip parents  with  the 
knowledge, skills,  and confidence to prevent underage drinking and substance use . The 
TTHY  campaign  involves a complex  interplay  of formative, process,  and outcomes 
evaluation  efforts. Evaluation  findings to  date suggest that  SAMHSA  has met many  
markers for early  success,  including strongly resonating with  intended TTHY  audiences.  
The growing body of evidence presented in  the most  recent Report to  Congress on the 
Prevention and Reduction of Underage Drinking supports that key  campaign  messages  
serve as  important cues to action  that increase both the  plans and actions  of parents  to talk 
with their  children  about underage drinking and other substance use.  There is  further 
evidence to  suggest that  TTHY  increases  parents’ confidence not only in talking  with  
their children  about underage drinking and  other substance use  but also in the behavioral 
efficacy  of their efforts . Federal partners should explore opportunities to  expand the reach  
of the TTHY National  Media Campaign among communities . 
Drug -Free Communities  (DFC)  Support  Program:  
Local Problems,  Local Solutions  
The Drug-Free Communities (DFC) Support Program, created by the Drug-Free Communities 
Act of 1997, mobilizes communities to prevent youth substance use. Led by the Office of 
National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), the DFC Program provides grants to community coalitions to strengthen the 
infras tructure among local partners needed to reduce local youth substance use. Recognizing that 
local problems need local solutions, DFC coalitions engage multiple sectors of the community 
and employ a variety of environmental strategies to address local substance use problems. 
Through the National Coalition Institute (NCI) grant program, DFC and non-DFC funded 
community coalitions are trained to use the Strategic Prevention Framework (SPF) and the Seven 
Strategies for Community Change. These frameworks acknowle dge that environmental contexts 
impact the risk of youth substance use. 
An estimated 57 million (18 -percent of the U.S. population) lived in communities served by DFC 
coalitions receiving funding in FY 2019. This included approximately 2.3 million middle school 
students ages 12 to 14 and 3.2 million high school students ages 15 to 18. As demonstrated by 
the National Cross Site Evaluation, DFC funded community coalitions are effective in reducing 
youth substance use. Across all DFC coalitions ever funded, pa st 30 -day use of alcohol, tobacco, 
marijuana, and prescription drug misuse among middle schoolers declined by 25-percent, 34-
percent, 13-percent, and 10-percent respectively from 2002 to 2020. High school past 30-day use 
of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and prescription drugs declined by 21-percent, 31-percent, 7 -
percent, and 28-percent respectively. All reductions in past 30 -day prevalence of use for this 
sample were significant.  
In addition to the substances listed above, almost all currently funded DFC coalitions have 
identified opioids —including prescription drugs, heroin, and synthetic opioids like fentanyl— as 
one of their top five substances of focus. Source: Drug-Free Communities Support Program 
National Cross-Site Evaluation, End -of-Year 2020 Report. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  29 D. Ensure guidance for the safe disposal of unused prescription medication is 
consistent across the interagency to support communities across the country. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; EPA; HHS/CDC, FDA)  
Prescription drug misuse, the consumption  of prescription medication  inappropriately 
such as taking  prescription  medication  not prescribed to  you or taking  prescription  
medication  in a way  other  than  prescribed, remains  a significant problem for 
communities  across the country. The 2020 National  Survey on Drug Use  and Health  
estimates  that approximately 9.3 million  people misused  prescription pain  relievers,  5.1 
million  people misused  prescription  stimulants,  and 6.2 million  people misused  
prescription tranquilizers or sedatives  in 2020.115 The availability  of prescription 
medications  found in  the home and the misconception  that because these medications  are 
prescribed they  are therefore safer  than  illicit substances,  increase risk  for youth 
substance use.  The Drug Enforcement Administration’s  (DEA)  National  Prescription  
Drug Take-Back  Initiative (NTBI) affords communities  the opportunity to  raise  
awareness  about the  dangers of having unused or expired prescription medications  easily  
accessible to  youth, and the need to safely s ecure drugs in the home. As  a complement to  
DEA’s  NTBI , FDA’s Remove the Risk  campaign  helps communities understand the  
important  role they play  in removing and properly disposing of unused prescription  
medications  when  a take back  location  is not immediately  available. Consistent guidance 
around safe  and environmentally responsible disposal methods to  remove unused 
medications  from the home is  needed. This  action  is necessary  to reduce availability  and 
prevent misuse  of these dangerous substances  by youth and young adults.   
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  30 Harm  Reduction  
Harm  reduction is  an approach that emphasizes  working directly  with  people  who  use drugs  
(PWUD)  to prevent  overdose  and infectious disease transmission,  improve  the physical, mental,  
and social  wellbeing  of those  served, and offer low -threshold options  for accessing  substance use 
disorder (SUD) treatment  and other  health  care services.  In the  context  of the nation’s overdose 
epidemic, the  Office  of National  Drug Control  Policy  (ONDCP)  currently defines  harm  
reduction as a public  health  approach designed to  advance policies  and programs  for PWUD,  
based  on the  principles  of Care/Support/Connect/Respect.  For additional  background on this,  
please see  text box on Defining Harm  Reduction  Principles,  page 32. A  comprehensive  harm  
reduction program  consists of initiatives and measures aimed at mitigating the adverse public 
health and social consequences of drug use, which are an integral part of a continuum of care. 
The programs must be evidence-based  and p erson-centered.   
Policy  and program  changes  are required to reach  PWUD —central  to this effort  must  be 
increased  adoption of a  harm  reduction approach. As was highlighted by the bipartisan 
Commission on Combating Synthetic Opioid T rafficking , harm reduction programs not only offer 
protection from elevated risks posed by today’s drug supply, but often serve as points of entry for long-term treatment.
116 Harm  reduction programs  build trust  and engagement  between  
outreach  workers, including  peers  with  lived  experience, and PWUD . These individuals,  
including people  experiencing  unstable  housing or homelessness,  are at high risk  of overdose  and 
of contracting  or transmitting  infectious  diseases,  such  as hepatitis B, hepatitis C or HIV,  and can  
benefit  from  harm  reduction services  to improve  their  health,  build linkages  to physical  and 
mental  health  services,  and provide  low-threshold, flexible opportunities  to initiate substance use 
disorder treatment.   
Not all of those who use drugs have SUD, which is  a chronic  medical  disease  that is driven by a  
host of biological  and environmental  factors. However, for many  PWUD,  whether they have 
been formally diagnosed with an SUD or not, regular substance use  is difficult  to stop, even  
when negative consequences  mount. These individuals  are often  caught  between  substance use  
that both fuels  and impedes  their  daily  life and a  health care system  that lacks  the engagement  
capacity  to meet  them  where  they are and fails to engage them  in health  and social  services.   
According to  the 2020 National  Survey on  Drug Use  and Health  (NSDUH),  the vast majority  of 
the over 40 million  living in the United States who  need treatment for SUD are  not currently 
receiving  addiction treatment  services.117 This  means  that while some  with  SUD, as well as the 
larger group of PWUD, seek  and receive care,  there are  far more  who  have  not yet received  the 
support  they  need. The reason why most of those with SUD have not received treatment is that 
they did not seek it. Harm reduction programs have the potential to proactively reach out to these individuals and offer them the level of care they are ready to accept. M any people  with  SUD  also 
face stigma from  public  and health  care professionals  which  may  result  in hesitation  to seek  
treatment.
118 PWUD are  at increased  risk of fatal  overdose, particularly  from  knowingly or 
unknowingly consuming subst ances  containing illicitly  manufactured  fentanyl  and its analogues. 
Early interventions  are necessary  to provide  harm  reduction services  and offer treatment  and 
health  services  to prevent  loss of life.  
Harm reduction programs  enable  PWUD  to access  services  which  reduce  overdose  risk and 
enhance  health  and safety.  Trust  developed  between  harm  reduction  outreach  workers  and 
PWUD  often facilitates  a range  of potentially life -saving options  including adequate  supplies  of 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  31 naloxone, sterile injection supplies such as syringes, and fentanyl  test strips  (FTS) ; linkage to 
evidence -based treatment,  including medication  for opioid use  disorder (MOUD);  screening  for 
HIV and H epatitis  C infection;  and access  to health  and social  services  that address  social  
determinants.   
Research  shows  harm  reduction  programs  produce  results.  For example:  
• People  who  use heroin and others  who  inject  drugs  who  regularly utilize a  syringe  
services program  (SSP) —which provide sterile syringes and other health and social 
services —are  five times  more  likely  to initiate SUD treatment,  compared  with  those  who  
have  never used  an SSP.119 
• SSPs can  be effective platforms  to motivate people  with  opioid use  disorder (OUD) to  
enroll  in substance use  treatment  and, over time,  to reduce  drug use  and number of drug 
injections —according to a local study .120  
• Expanded buprenorphine  treatment  and linkage  to social  services  have  been  identified  as 
major  contributors  to the success of a  Philadelphia  SSP.121 
• SSPs have  also been  shown to  substantially reduce  HIV and H epatitis  C infection  among 
people  who  inject  drugs.122 
• In addition  to saving lives  and improving health,  harm  reduction programs  that include 
providing clean syringes and medications for OUD —are  highly cost -effective,  both when  
these services are provided separately  and even  more  so when  combined.123 
• Using  FTS and receiving  a positive test  result  has been  associated  with  changes  in drug 
use behavior and perceptions  of the risks of an overdose .124 
• Analysis  also indicates  that distribution  of naloxone  to counter the effects  of an  opioid 
overdose  not only saves lives but also  produces  a significant  return on investment.125 
We must  continue  to conduct  research  on the optimal  ways  to deliver,  expand, and continuously 
improve  the health of PWUD, especially through supporting and evaluating harm  reduction 
programs. With an increase of public health resources being committed to support h arm 
reduction programs, there is opportunity to evaluate current approaches and offer 
recommendations for improving services in collaboration with PWUD and the programs that 
support them. Harm  reduction programs  are vital,  as they  provide  resources  and connection  to 
people  who  are at highest  risk for overdose  and poor health  outcomes, including  conditions  often 
associated  with  injection  drug use  such  as blood-borne  diseases  and heart  conditions  (such as  
endocarditis).126 The types  of interventions  proposed in  this chapter,  such  as SSPs,  distribution of 
naloxone, FTS,  and expanded opportunities  to initiate low-threshold treatment  with  
buprenorphine  (e.g., without  preconditions  of any kind127) will  save  lives,  improve  health,  and 
likely  have  a favorable  economic  benefit  to society.   
 
    
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  32 ONDCP’s  Guiding  Principles  on Harm  Reduction  
Research  and experience have shown how and why  harm reduction  approaches are effective.  The 
following principles are  integrated  into harm reduction programs.  
1. Care. Staff  and peer outreach workers  must  support individuals in  accessing  the care they 
need  and to overcome obstacles.  This can  include:  naloxone and  overdose prevention strategies  
and tools;  sterile syringes and other injection equipment ; medications  for opioid use  disorders 
and other SUD treatment;  and physical health  and mental  health  services. Entry into different 
types of  low-threshold group support and mentoring  relationships,  including through peer 
workers, also  must be supported.  
2. Support.  Ongoing  support is  often  required after  harm reduction  or SUD treatment services 
are initiated.  People who are in  SUD treatment  or have completed  an episode of substance  use 
disorder treatment  may  resume  or continue to use substances. This can  be addressed through 
ongoing support provided by harm reduction programs, or other evidence-based  interventions. 
Substance use should not be a reason  for punishment or to  limit  access  to health  or social  
services.  PWUD  accessing  services through harm reduction organizations  also  need  access  to 
housing, nutritious  food, education  or training,  and employment.  
3. Connection.  PWUD,  especially  those  who  inject drugs, those who are experiencing 
homeless ness, or  those who experience social  marginalization , must  have regular access  to 
harm reduction  services  and the opportunity to connect with staff or volunteers —without 
preconditions. All PWUD in the United States deserve the opportunity to forge a personal 
connection with a caring non-judgmental individual as  part of receiving health  and social  
services.  PWUD deserve support not just  in reducing drug  or alcohol  use, but also  in 
improving any aspect  of their  lives  they  want  to work on. 
4. Respect.  PWUD are often in  psychological  or physical  pain. They  are generally  aware  of the 
negative  consequences  of their  substance use  on themselves  and others,  including family  
members. This knowledge can  cause  shame,  despair, and embarrassment  and create  additional  
obstacles  to treatment  entry to someone who wishes to do so . Research  finds that individuals 
who have a voice  in when  and how  they will  receive help,  who establish  their  own  harm 
reduction, treatment , or recovery goals, and  who are treated  with respect,  dignity,  and a 
recognition  of their  autonomy, are more receptive to receiving help and  achieve better  
outcomes., 
Principle 1: Integrating Harm Reduction into the U.S. 
Substance Use Disorder System of Care Is Necessary to Save 
Lives and Increase Access to Treatment  
It is vital  that the entire SUD  system  of care  meet  people where they are and offer individuals  the 
help that will save  their  lives,  improve their  health,  and enable the m to access  a full menu  of 
prevention, treatment  and recovery support services  on terms  they  will accept.  Harm  reduction 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  33 services  are an essential  part of the  continuum  of care for  PWUD  and should be  linked  to SUD  
treatment  and to  the larger health  care system.   
A. Federal harm reduction efforts to support state and local partners. (Agencies 
Involved: AmeriCorps; DOD; DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; USDA; VA/VHA) 
To address  SUDs  and related  problems  effectively,  health  care systems,  including those  
in correctional  settings,  need  to be comprehensive  and complementary,  with  all key 
components  adequately  funded. Because  it helps  prevent  overdoses, provides  
opportunities  for low -threshold treatment,  and creates  pathways  into other  health  and 
social  services,  harm  reduction is  becoming  a critical  part of the  system  of care.  
However, it  remains  underfunded128 and even  where  there have  been  some  program  
increases,  there are still too many  individuals  and regions  of the  country129 that lack  basic  
harm  reduction services  such  as access  to low-cost,  accessible,  life-saving  naloxone  and 
FTS.  Federal  funding must  continue  to support  comprehensive  community -based  harm  
reduction efforts, just  as they  must  fund traditional  brick and mortar  treatment  centers  and 
office -based  treatment  for OUD (discussed  in Substance Use Disorder Treatment 
chapter ), recovery  support  services  (discussed  in Building a Recovery-Ready Nation  
chapter ), and prevention (discussed  in Preve ntion and Early Intervention chapter). Public  
health  systems,  which  are supported by federal  behavioral  health  grants, should 
collaborate with  harm  reduction organizations. These organizations  work directly  with  
PWUD,  helping to  keep  them  alive and safe,  building trust and connection, and creating  
access  points  to treatment  and recovery services  that otherwise  would not  exist.  Congress  
took an  important  step when  it appropriated dedicated  federal  harm  reduction funding 
through the  American  Rescue  Plan.  These  ARP  funds, comprising $30 million,  should 
complement  existing  funding streams  that support  harm  reduction services.  States  should 
also consider opportunities  for braiding together  federal  funds  with  existing  ongoing  
initiatives  to enhanc e the impact  of harm  reduction  programs. Further, it  is necessary  to 
build and sustain  community -based  organizational  and service  capacity  that will scale  
high quality  comprehensive  harm  reduction  efforts. Agencies  should review,  and as 
necessary,  update  their  strategic planning documents, grant  programs, and training and  
technical  assistance efforts  to ensure  that harm  reduction approaches  are appropriately 
emphasized  in all of their  SUD  and behavioral  health  work.  
B. Ensure that harm reduction organizations have a plentiful supply of naloxone. 
(Agencies Involved: HHS/CDC, CMS, FDA, HRSA, IHS, SAMHSA; ONDCP; VA/VHA) 
To fully address  the rising overdose  death  rates,  it is imperative that  the supply and 
distribution of naloxone  is robust  and continuous, without  interruption. Although 
naloxone  formulations  and prices  vary, they  are an extremely  cost-effective life -saving  
intervention.  Harm  reduction organizations,  working on the  frontlines  of the  overdose  
epidemic,  need  a steady  supply of naloxone  to ensure  continuity  of service.  Similarly,  
first responders  and law  enforcement  officers  need  a robust  supply of naloxone  to save  
lives.  One  international  study suggests  the need  for 20 times  as many  naloxone  kits to be 
publicly  distributed  as annual  opioid- related  deaths  per year.130 The Department  of 
Health  and Human  Services  (HHS)  should assess and provide  recommendations  on how  
to address  bottlenecks  and increase state and  local  availability  of naloxone, especially  as 
distribut ed by harm  reduction  organizations  and also  including  other supply chain  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  34 concerns, such  as pharmacies  that do not  carry naloxone  or make it  easily  and discretely  
accessible to  PWUD  and their  family  and friends.  
C. Consider allowing coverage for harm reduction services. (Agencies Involved: DOD; 
HHS/CDC, CMS, HRSA, IHS, SAMHSA; ONDCP; VA/VHA)  
Public  payers  and private  insurance  companies  could consider broadening coverage  of 
harm  reduction services.  The Centers  for Medicare & Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  has 
approved Medicaid  coverage  for harm  reduction  services  in New York State.131 Although 
this effort  is limited  in scope,  it demonstrates  the potential  to incorporate  harm  reduction 
as a public  health  approach at  a state’s  option into  the Medicaid  program. Additional  
services  could be  considered  for coverage.  States  may  develop  a comprehensive work 
plan for coverage  opportunities  for these critical  services  under Medicaid  and Medicare,  
including steps  to move  this priority forward in  the next year. Outcomes  would surely be  
enhanced  through consultation with  harm  reduction and public  health  providers  and 
individuals  with  lived  experience and their representatives  to accommodate the unique  
challenges  in developing  a workable  reimbursement/  billing  approach. Covered services  
through harm  reduction  programs  could  incorporate  direct  services,  care coordination, 
and managing  transitions  between  different  service providers. Critical  services  include:  
intake and comprehensive risk  assessment;  harm  reduction  counseling/  psychotherapy;  
client  navigation;  referrals;  support  groups;  wellness  services;  peer  training;  opioid 
overdose  prevention training;  monitoring and follow -up; crisis  intervention;  
reassessment;  case  closure;  coordination activities;  nutrition support;  / wellness  care;  
medication  management;  and supervisory oversight/  case -specific supervision. States  
may wish  to consider services  and supports  to address  social  determinants  of health,  
including housing, transportation, and job training  as part of harm  reduction. HHS  could 
work to  increase coverage  of harm  reduction related  health  care services,  while  protecting 
patient  privacy. HHS  should also  make a special  effort  to bring these harm  reduction  
services  to Tribal  and urban Indian communities.   
D. Comprehensively assess current evidence base on harm reduction strategies, and develop a plan for additional translational research.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ; 
HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA; ONDCP ; USDA; VA/VHA)  
There  is a substantial  evidence base
132 for the  effectiveness  and cost -effectiveness133 of 
some  harm  reduction  services,  such  as SSPs and naloxone  distribution. Other  strategies  of 
engagement  may  be shown to  be effective  as research  continues.  Funders  and service  
providers  need  access  to more  research  about  the harm  reduction  services  that work well,  
and those  that could be  refined  or adapted  as they  are delivered  at the local  level  to meet  
the needs  of specific  communities.  Research  should include consultation  with  PWUD,  as 
appropriate, in  order to  understand how  to design programs  that will best meet  their needs  
and enhance  their  health.  A focus  must  be on saving lives.  Over  the past five years  there 
has been  a significant  expansion of naloxone  distribution and utilization,  nonetheless  fatal  
overdoses  have  continued to increase.  Research  is needed to inform  public  health  and 
public  safety  agencies  how  to best maximize the  life-saving impact  of naloxone  through 
more robust  and impactful  individual  and community  distribution  through pharmacies,  
health  care providers, and community  organizations  of all  kinds.  
The National  Institute  on Drug Abuse (NIDA),  in partnership with  other  federal  partners, 
including the CDC, could convene  a gathering of public  health  and harm  reduction  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  35 researchers,  practitioners,  policy  makers,  and those  with  lived  experience to chart  out a 
“next  generation”  harm  reduction  research  agenda  that builds  on the  strong empirical  
foundation that  exists  for some  interventions.  This  work can  be aided  by HRSA’s  Federal  
Office  of Rural  Health  Policy.  Critical  to this effort  will be concurrent  work to  identify 
and address  barriers  to research  on harm  reduction  interventions,  including  statutory  and 
regulatory impediments.  The federal  government  should launch and study more  harm  
reduction initiatives  as a public  health  approach, and ensure  that these efforts  (and the  
evaluation  of these efforts), which  all involve  working direc tly with  people  who  currently  
use drugs, are  not unreasonably impeded  or constrained  by laws,  policies,  or practices.  
The Department  of Justice (DOJ)  should continue  to serve  as an active partner  in this 
type work by HHS  and other federal  partners  in developing plans  to ensure  that this 
critically  important  research  can go forward and legislative and other  barriers  to harm  
reduction research  are addressed.  
E. Conduct a national harm reduction needs assessment. (Agencies Involved: DOD; 
DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; USDA/ORD; VA/VHA)  
There  has never  been  a comprehensive national  assessment  of the country’s  unmet  need  
for harm  reduction  services  for PWUD.  Harm  reduction providers  often struggle  to meet  
the needs  of the  people  they  service  due to resource  limitations.  Staff  is generally  
underpaid and many  programs  rely heavily  on volunteers. As  programs  scale up to  meet  
the need, total staffing, as  well  as the capacity  of the  programs  to provide  a broader array 
of services,  will have  to grow  as well.  The challenge of adding to  the harm  reduction  
work force, with  widespread demand for labor, can  be mitigated  by utilizing  the millions  
of Americans  with  lived  experience and providing them  with  training  and mentoring.  
Data systems  to support  program  delivery (as discussed below), while protecting patient  
privacy, are  also under-resourced. Harm  reduction  initiatives  provide  an ideal  platform  
both to  initiate low -threshold treatment  services,  as well  as to link people  to treatment  
and recovery support  service  providers. SSPs,  with  additional  resources, could potentially  
expand these efforts  significantly  and provide  ongoing care  coordination. Some  states  
(e.g., New York,134 Missouri,135 and Washington136) have  already  established  health  hubs  
or other initiatives  to provide  harm  reduction and low -threshold treatment  services  under 
one roof, a  model  ripe for studying and replicating.  Organizations  and agencies  that 
provide  peer  support  and health  system  navigation could be  a part of this  initiative.  It will 
be critical  to promote  collaboration and avoid  unnecessary duplication to the maximum  
extent  possible. Federal  agencies  should assess the  issue,  conduct  a national  workforce  
study to  provide  an accurate picture  of those  now  delivering  harm  reduction services,  and 
project  needs  required to  provide  comprehensive high-quality  harm  reduction services  
wherever they  are needed.  This work should be  completed  in coordination with  the 
National  HIV/AIDS  Strategy137 and the  National  Viral  Hepatitis  Strategy.138  
F. Support harm reduction training and education for the treatment workforce. (Agencies Involved: AmeriCorps; HHS/CDC, HR SA, SAMHSA; USDA; VA/VHA)  
Current  unmet  needs  for staffing harm  reduction  programs  should primarily  be addressed  
by recruiting and training  new  staff  to serve  as peer  support  workers  and addiction  
counselors. In addition, many  of those  who  work in  existing  treatment  programs  would  
benefit  from  short  courses  on harm  reduction. In both cases,  lived  experience is  an 
important  asset  in successfully  doing this work. Because states  currently  certify  peer  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  36 support  workers  under different  systems  an effort  to develop  a consistent  approach and  to 
allow  for reciprocity agreement  among states  would provide  increased  flexibility  and 
resilience to  the workforce. HHS  and ONDCP  should engage  on how  to increase the  
availability  and transferability  of certification  with  state partners. A  variety  of training  
and academic programs  can be updated, with  the support  of HHS,  the Department  of 
Agriculture  (USDA),  and VA,  to more  fully incorporate  comprehensive  harm  reduction 
approaches  into public  health  guida nce or trainings  they  provide  relating  to PWUD.  In 
addition, as the harm  reduction  work force  grows, those  trained  in public  health  and 
traditional  treatment  methodology should receive short  courses  to supplement  their  pre-
existing  knowledge  base.  Many  peer  support  workers  are well -suited  to work in  harm  
reduction and can  earn  receive harm  reduction and other  relevant  training as  they  
continue  to work as  peers. Skepticism  about  harm  reduction  within  the prevention, 
treatment  field  and recovery support  services  communities  can be addressed through 
dissemination  of science- and evidence-based  practice and training materials,  dialogue, 
site visits,  and other  appropriate  mechanisms  supported by HHS.  All sectors  of the  SUD  
field would benefit  from  updated evidence -based  knowledge  regarding how  and why  
harm  reduction programs  are reducing overdoses, addressing stigma,  improving the  
health  and safety  of PWUD,  and providing valuable  new  entry  points  to treatment.  HHS  
operating divisions  should int egrate  comprehensive harm  reduction  training  into their 
work, in  coordination with  other  federal  partners, relevant  NGOs,  and technical  
assistance and training providers. 
G. Facilitate low barrier buprenorphine induction through harm reduction 
organizations. (Agencies Involved: HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; VA/VHA)  
The emerging evidence suggests  that harm  reduction programs  are well  suited  to initiate 
use of buprenorphine.139,140 Because of the  less formal  setting  of harm  reduction  
programs, and the  reality  that some  who  initiate buprenorphine  through an  SSP may  still 
be using drugs, specialized  guidance  should be  developed  by HHS.  Buprenorphine  was 
found to  significantly  reduces  overdose  risks  in a local  study141 and improves  health  
outcomes  even  if the patient  is not fully abstinent.142,143 Ideally,  medication  is 
supplemented  by counseling and recovery  support  services.  HHS  and VA should consider  
how to increase use  of oral and extended-release injectable buprenorphine  at harm  
reduction sites.  Communi ty-based  harm  reduction organizations  are also well -suited  to 
work with  local  public  health  departments,  hospitals,  emergency  medical  services  (EMS),  
community  health  clinics,  and law  enforcement  to follow  up after  non-fatal  overdoses  to 
initiate buprenorphine  if individuals  are not already  engaged  in an ongoing SUD  
treatment  program. HHS  agencies  could incorporate  clearer  language  on support  for low-
threshold buprenorphine  induction  in their notice of funding announcements  for 
appropriate  grant  programs  and work with  harm  reduction nongovernmental  
organizations, interested  recovery community  organizations, local  public  health  
departments  and state drug and alcohol  directors  to increase the  resources  available for  
this important  work, while tracking  results  with  regard to  overdose  rates  and retention  in 
SUD  treatment.  Departments  and agencies  should work to  incentivize research  and 
clinical  work around the  field  of harm  reduction  and substance use  treatment  in general.  
Federally  funded provider and research  supplemental  reimbursement  should be  
considered.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  37 The Promise  and Challenge  of Reimbursable  Harm  Reduction  Services   
Harm  reduction programs provide urgently needed  health  services  and support to  a vulnerable 
population and save  money  for governments by preventing disease transmission,  lowering  
reliance on emergency  room visits  and hospitalization,  and decreasing arrests,  prosecutions, and 
incarcerations.  Nonetheless,  the nature of harm reduction work complicates  standard 
reimbursement approaches  and may  require  new mechanisms.   
Building trust takes  time and repeated  contact.  This is true both for individuals and within 
communities. Ways  must  be found to  develop community -level partnerships, reimburse harm 
reduction organizations for this  effort and to encourage program participants  to accept  care.  In 
addition, some  important  interactions  between  PWUD and harm reduction  staff  can be very 
brief, while others can  be quite lengthy. 
Many  SSPs may  have never offered any health  care services  that could be billed  to Medicaid.  
They  can lack the infrastructure for Medicaid  billing, comprehensive set of evidence -based harm 
reduction services or the sufficient volume of services/claims  to build  a self -supporting billing  
department or they  may  not operate a facility  that is eligible for enrollment as  a Medicaid  
provider. Part  of making harm  reduction  programs sustainable is exploring reimbursement 
models that accommodate these challenges . Without this  added support and infrastructure, it  will 
be difficult  for SSPs to  develop into comprehensive, high-quality, sustainable services that 
promote PWUD health and safety . In addition, many  harm  reduction  services  are provided by 
peers, but those services  provided by peers  that Medicaid  supports are  reimbursed at  lower rates.   
Finally,  the array of harm  reduction billable services  needs to  be significantly  expanded to  
benefit SSPs and their  participants.  Some services are not billable under Medicaid and  CMS 
should explore changes and/or demonstrations to  permit federal  funds to  support these  services. 
An initial  list of proposed services  that could be considered for reimbursement is  included  in the 
Action  Item  on the next  page.  We note that although Medicaid  support for SSPs and other harm 
reduction programs will be  extremely  important,  these programs will also  continue to  require 
other federal,  state,  local,  and private funds to  fulfill their mission.   
Principle 2: Collaboration on Harm Reduction with Public 
Safety Agencies 
Law enforcement can  and should be an  essential partner  for harm reduction programs. For  
example,  the North Carolina Harm  Reduction Coalition, working with  the Law  Enforcement  
Assisted  Diversion program (LEAD),  has worked with  police and sheriffs to  redirect  low-level 
offenders to  community -based  services,  rather than  incarceration.144 Additional studies of LEAD  
supported initiatives  find that these collaborations  reduce criminal  justice costs  without 
negatively  impacting  public safety.145 Critical  to the success  of pre-arrest diversion and  
deflection  programs involving harm  reduction programs is  good communication  and 
coordination between  law enforcement agencies  and program staff  in order to identify  
appropriate cases  for diversion and deflection  based  upon the fact -specific characteristics  of each  
individual and situation.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  38 A. Conduct National -level dialogue on harm reduction with law enforcement 
associations. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; HHS; ONDCP)  
National  law enforcement  associations,  as well as representatives  of first  responder 
organizations  and state and local  justice system  officials , are critical  partners  for state  and 
local  communities  in both increasing  knowledge  about  harm  reduction programs  and 
policies  and providing practical  feedback about  how  to ensure  harm  reduction  programs  
are collaborating  effectively  with  law enforcement.  Law  enforcement  agencies  also have  
unique  knowledge  about  drug markets  that impact  harm  reduction  work. T his two-way  
dialogue  is a critical  element  to ensure  support  for the  further development  of harm  
reduction initiatives  to reduce  overdoses  and improve  access  to health  services,  while  
also ensuring that  law enforcement  officers  can fulfill  their  public  safety  responsibilities.  
To a significant  degree, the  success of harm  reduction programs  depends  on good 
working relationships  with  state and local  law enforcement  agencies.  All Americans,  
whatever  their  background, deserve  a fair opportunity to  benefit  from  health  services  
instead  of punishment. Stigmatized  populations  and minority groups  have  often been  
denied  access  to compassionate alternatives  to arrest  and incarceration.146,147,148 Voices  
from  these communities  need  to be included  in the development  of initiatives  that impact  
them.  Dialogue  at a national  level  between  federal  policy  makers,  law enforcement  
associations,  and harm  reduction organizations  will help  to strengthen  positive  
relationships. These conversations  at the national  level  should be  designed  to support  and 
spur follow  on harm  reduction discussions  with  law enforcement  and community  groups  
at the state and local  level  since that is where  so many  critical  public  health  and public  
safety  decisions  are made.  ONDCP,  in cooperation  with  the Office  of Justice  Programs  
(OJP),  should convene  a meeting  about  harm  reduction with  national  law enforcement  
associations  and advocacy groups  and, based  on the  dialogue, produce  a document  for 
public  release highlighting key  principles  to foster effective  cooperation between  law 
enforcement  and harm  reduction organizations  that advance public  health  and public  
safety  goals.  
B. Develop guidance on pre-arrest diversion and deflection to harm reduction 
programs. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/COPS, OJP; HHS/ASPE, CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; ONDCP)  
State and local  police  departments  and sheriff’s  offices  are already  critical  partners  with  
harm  reduction organizations  in many  parts  of the  country. Officers  often encounter 
individuals  with  SUD  in their  daily  work, or in response  to calls  for assistance.  When  no 
arrest  is made,  officers  are increasingly  facilitating  pre-arrest  diversion or deflection  into 
available programs  when appropriate and without negatively impacting public safety. In 
order to  produce  the best outcome,  referrals  to service providers  to the maximum  extent  
possible  should include a  discussion  between  the individual  and a clinician  about  what  
type of care is  the best fit. The individual  should have  the opportunity to choose  a harm  
reduction program. Often, the  success of a  harm  reduction program  in a community  is 
directly  related  to the existing  community  partnerships, including those  with  local  law 
enforcement  officials.  To foster this effort, law  enforcement  officers  can help agencies 
identify best practices and appropriate criteria, in collaboration with public health and public safety agencies including DOJ and HHS, for referrals based upon a fact -specific 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  39 evaluation of the characteristics of the individual and situation without negatively 
impacting public safety.  
C. Support use of specialized case management for PWUD . (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; ONDCP) 
Recognized by SAMHSA  as one of the  eight  principles  of community -based  behavioral  
health  services  for justice-involved individuals,149 specialized  case management  (SCM)  
incorporates  treatment,  social  services,  and social  supports  that address  prior and current  
involvement  with  the criminal  justice system  and reduce  the likelihood of recidivism,  
which  enhances  public  safety.  SCM promotes  collaboration in  the delivery of effective  
SUD,  mental  health,  and medical  treatment,  as well  as recovery support  and social  
services.  Comprehensive  assessments  identify  individual  needs,  strengths, clinical  
diagnoses, and corresponding levels  of care.  This  information serves  as the foundation for 
an individualized  care  plan  devised  with  each  client.  SCM,  originally  developed by 
Treatment  Alternatives  for Safe  Communities  (TASC)150 nearly  50 years  ago, is  a critical  
element  for pre -arrest  alternatives  to incarceration  or deflection  through harm  reduction 
programs. The  clinical  focus, client  engagement  and navigation  skills,  and the  safety  net 
it provides  help  to keep  individuals  from  falling  between  the cracks.  It also provides  a 
partner for police  departments  making  the decision  to avoid an  arrest.  Funding for case 
management is available through HHS  grants, as  well  as through the Medicaid  program . 
The potential  return on investment  for these  monies  may  be substantial,  since  programs  
that reduce  incarceration  can produce  significant  savings  for counties  and cities.  HHS  and 
DOJ should work to  ensure  their  current  technical  assistance and grant  programs  support  
SCM in  harm  reduction settings  and consult  with  providers  and harm  reduction 
organizations  to determine if new  guidance  or initiatives  are required.  
D. Reduce fatal overdoses through data-driven efforts to get naloxone to where it is 
most urgently needed.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, 
SAMHSA; ONDCP; VA/VHA)  
All PWUD  need  access  to naloxone, since  much  of the  drug supply (including  stimulants  
such as methamphetamine a nd cocaine)  now  contain  synthetic  opioids. It  is, however, 
especially  urgent  that a focused and comprehensive effort  is made  to get naloxone  to 
those  who  are at the highest  risk of a fatal  overdose. This  population includes  those  who:  
have  previously had  a non-fatal  overdose;  recently  visited  an emergency  room  for a drug 
related  health  problem;  were  just released  from  prison or jail  and have  a history of drug 
use; or have  recently  left a treatment  program  without  completing  the program. State  and 
local  public  health  and safety  agencies  must  pool  their  available data  and provide  help  to 
those  that need  better  access  to naloxone. These same data  will reveal  geographic  areas  
with a pattern  of overdoses  where  vulnerable  populations  may  live. This knowledge  can 
empower  a much  more  efficient  distribution of naloxone  and can guide  harm  reduction 
programs’ outreach. Federal  departments,  especially  HHS  and DOJ,  should ensure  their  
grant  funds  support  these types  of data -driven collaborations, as  well  as the collection  and 
dissemination  of best  practices  information. The  experience of the  Veterans  Health  
Administration’s  Overdose  Education  and Naloxone  Distribution Program151 should 
inform  this work. HHS  should saturate geographic  regions  with  high overdose  rates  with  
naloxone  in order to  experiment  with  dissemination  models  which  ensure  convenient,  low 
cost, high volume  access.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  40 Principle 3: Foster  Changes  in State  Laws and Policies to 
Support  Harm Reduction  
 Harm  reduction programs  reduce  overdoses,152 improve  the health  of PWUD,153,154 and, as  
referenced  in the chapter  introduction above, increase treatment  entry. Federal,  state,  and local  
agencies  must  identify  obstacles  to expansion of harm  reduction  programs  and address  them.  
Grantees  cannot  use most  annual  Federal  funding to  purchase  syringes. However, grantees  may  
use funding from  Section  2706 of the  American  Rescue Plan  ($30 million)  appropriated to  
support  harm  reduction programs, including to  purchase  syringes. Sterile syringes  are a critical  
function of SSPs and purchasing the  syringes  can be costly, especially  for small  programs  with  
few resources. Often  the need  for sterile  syringes  draws  PWUD  into initial  contact  with health  
workers, providing an  opportunity for programs  to connect  PWUD  with  other  services,  including 
low-threshold SUD  treatment  with  buprenorphine.  
In addition  to ensuring better  access  to harm  reduction supplies  and services,  there  are other 
changes  required t o ensure  harm  reduction  programs  have  what  they need  to help  their  
participants.  At a time when  much  of the  U.S. supply of illicit  drugs, as  well  as black -market  
prescription medications,  contain  deadly synthetic  opioids  such  as fentanyl,  PWUD  are at a high 
risk of overdose. In order to  keep  people  safe,  it is necessary  for states  to update  drug 
paraphernalia  laws  to allow  for distribution  of FTS.  Further, harm  reduction programs  are 
strengthened when  they are empowered to  connect  those  they  serve  to stable housing, services,  
and resources  to address  challenges  related  to the social  determinants  of health.  Further, because 
data analytics  both help  inform  harm  reduction  workers  who  is at highest  risk of overdose  and 
assist  in program  management,  tailored  knowledge  management  systems are  needed to support  
harm  reduction programs, while protecting  participant  privacy.  
A. Work with states to strengthen and expand Good Samaritan laws. (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA; O NDCP) 
Research  studies  conducted prior to the COVID-19 pandemic suggest  there is  a pattern  of 
lower  rates  of opioid-related  overdose  deaths  among states  that have  enacted  Good 
Samaritan  laws.155 These laws  can increase the likelihood that  individuals  will call 911 to 
seek medical  assistance when  they  see an overdose. However, not  all of these laws  are 
equal;  they differ, for example,  in which  offenses  they  cover  and the  level  of protection 
they offer. While some  state laws  provide  full criminal  immunity  from  arrest,  charges, 
and prosecution for those  who  contact  law enforcement  to prevent  a fatal  overdose, others  
mandate criminal  charges.  In some  places,  without  such  explicit  protections, health  
service providers  who  seek  to disseminate  sterile syringes  and work closely  with  PWUD  
are unable  to operate  an SSP,  or must  operate in  a very limited  fashion in  order to avoid  
criminal  prosecution. In order to  establish  a science-based, public  health  approach to  
reducing overdose  death s and the  transmission  of disease via  injection  drug use,  Good 
Samaritan  laws  should be  expanded, promoted, and fully utilized  to protect  harm  
reduction program  staff —working every day  to save  lives —from  inappropriate  
entanglement  with  legal  systems.  ONDCP  should work with  DOJ  and HHS  to assess  
current  state Good Samaritan  laws,  develop best  practices  and work to  educate law 
enforcement  and the  public  about  the laws.  Research  from  a local  study indicate  that even  
PWUD  who  do live a  state with  strong legal  protections  sometimes  do not  know  that they  
will not be arrested156 if they  report  an overdose. Thus, it  is equally  important  for federal  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  41 agencies  to provide  technical  assistance to  states  on development  and implementation  of 
strong laws,  and to  make sure  PWUD  know  about  how  they  are protected.  
B. Address obstacles to the expansion of drug checking, syringe services programs, and 
buprenorphine induction at harm reduction programs.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ; 
HHS; ONDCP)  
Federal  and/  or stat e restrictions  on urgently needed  supplies  for harm  reduction 
programs  (including syringes, drug checking  equipment  and oral  and injectable treatment  
medications)  impair  program  effectiveness,  impose  unreasonable  burdens  on harm  
reduction programs, and limit  their  ability  to serve  a vital  public  health  function. These  
harm  reduction programs  work with  a population facing  serious  threats  to their  health  and 
safety  and can  benefit  from  increased  access  to syringes  or other equipment, such  as mass  
spectrometers157 that can detect  potentially  deadly  fentanyl  in drug supplies, puts  lives  at 
risk. The  use of FTS is  becoming increasingly  common. For  example,  in Massachusetts  
and Maine,  21 police  departments  are participating  in the One2One  initiative which  
supports  police officers  and community  partners  in distributing  FTS kits.158 Many  more  
people  can be served  and many  more  lives  saved  if restrictions  are identified  and 
eliminated.  In addition to  updating Good Samaritan  laws  (as highlighted above), federal  
agencies  need  to examine current  drug-related  laws,  policies,  and grant  and research  
programs, to  better  integrate harm  reduction. HHS  should review  its substance  use 
programs  department -wide  to identify policies  or practices  that may  impede SSPs and 
other harm  reduction services  and studies.  ONDCP  will work with  federal  partners  to 
identify  obstacles  to the safe,  legal,  and efficient  operation  of harm  reduction  programs  
and develop proposals for consideration.  
C. Promote access to services and supports addressing social determinants of health for those receiving harm reduction services.  (Agencies Involved: AmeriCorps; DOD; 
HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA; HUD; USDA; VA/VHA)  
Emer ging evidence indicates  that social  determinants  of health  impact  outcomes  for 
PWUD.
159 This  may  be especially  true for people  experiencing  unstable  housing or 
homelessness  and who  have  had repeated  encounters  with  law enforcement.  Access  to 
nutritious  food, showers, lockers, laundry,  transportation, communications, social  
activities,  employment  and education  are also valuable.  Harm  reduction outreach  workers  
know  the clients  they  work with,  what  their  challenges  are, and which  services  they  could 
benefit  from. Empowering harm  reduction  staff  to connect  people  they serve  to 
appropriate  assistance helps  to further build  rapport  between  client  and program  staff,  
create opportunities  for treatment  initiation,  and foster improved health  outco mes. HHS  
should collect  and disseminate emerging  evidence  on the intersection  of harm  reduction, 
social  determinants  of health  and substance  use outcomes, and identify  promising public  
health  practices.  SAMHSA  should collaborate with  CDC  to encourage  grantees  to 
address  social  determinants  to improve  the health  and treatment  engagement  of PWUD,  
emphasizing  the importance  of consolidating  an array of evidence-based  practices  and 
services  to enable “one  stop  shopping.”  NIDA and CDC  should support  research  in this 
area.   
D. Identify knowledge management tools and conduct implementation science research to foster efficient delivery of harm reduction services while protecting privacy.  
(Agencies Involved: DOJ; HHS/CDC, NIH; ONDCP)  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  42 Harm  reduction programs  face significant  challenges  staying  in touch with  those  they 
serve, delivering  requested  services  and supplies,  maintaining  engagement,  and following 
up. A  variety  of communications  and data  management  tools  should be  available to  harm  
reduction programs  to facilitate sustained  service delivery  and to  help  build connectivity  
between  program  and participants,  while allowing  for the  creation  of privacy  protected  
records, to  ensure  people  do not  ‘fall  through the  cracks’ due  to staff  turnover  or changes  
in behavior patterns  by PWUD.  Analysis  of emergency  and social  service utilization  
(e.g., contacts  with  hospitals, EMS,  or law  enforcement) may aid programs  in identifying 
and proactively  reaching out  to those  at high risk  of overdose. As  always  with  harm  
reduction programs, all  services  are voluntary and at  the discretion  of the  person seeking 
services.  However, it  is critical  to recognize  that the person being served  may  be 
suffering from  addiction, a  chronic  brain disorder. Therefore, proactively  checking  in on 
a person, expressing concern  and encouraging them  to drop by a  mobile clinic,  or 
offering naloxone  and support  services  can save  lives  while  still fully respecting  the 
autonomy and agency  of PWUD.  New innovations  in connecting  to PWUD,  through  
street  outreach  and distribution  of supplies, developed during the  pandemic should be  
made permanent.  Federal  agencies  should develop and disseminate data management  
practice guidelines  that help  harm  reduction staff  provide  services  while  protecting the 
privacy interests  of patients.  HHS,  DOJ,  and ONDCP  should consult  with  data  science 
experts  in government, non -profits, and the private  sector  to identify  the most  effective  
tools  and approaches  to put them  in the hands  of those  working in  direct  service  to reduce  
overdoses  and improve  the health  and safety  of PWUD.  This  work should inform  the 
publication  of guidance  documents, the  provision of technical  assistance and the updating 
of substance -related  grant  guidance  by DOJ,  HHS,  and ONDCP  to ensure  such  
technological  support  is an allowable use  for federal  funds. 
Principle 4: Support  Partnerships  on Harm Reduction 
Key partners  in public  health,  other SUD  system  and drug policy stakeholders  may  have  
important  questions, as  well  as insights  and suggestions  for harm  reduction administrators  and 
staff. ONDCP  will seek  to foster dialogue,  surface  key issues,  and use  what  is learned  to both 
enhance  mutual  understanding, improve  communications  strategies,  and to  identify  additional  
opportunities  to better  meet  the needs  of Americans  impacted  by SUD.    
A. Consult with experts on harm reduction.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; DOS; 
HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, SAMHSA; ONDCP; VA/VHA)  
Given  that the majority  of people  with  SUD  are not engaged  in treatment,  harm  reduction  
is a valuable and under-utilized  public  health  tool. It  is critically  important  to identify  
ways  to better  integrate harm  reduction services  with  other  health  initiatives,  to continue  
research  and data  collection,  and to further improve  existing  harm  reduction  initiatives.  
ONDCP,  in collaboration  with  other agencies  listed  above  will seek,  through ad  hoc 
meetings  and exchanges,  to learn  from  the experiences  of federal,  state,  and local  officials  
and harm  reduction organizations  to ensure  we understand the  state of harm  reduction 
programs  today around the country and the challenges  they, and their partners  in 
government  face.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  43 B. Facilitate increased dialogue among prevention, treatment, public health, and harm 
reduction communities.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ; HHS; ONDCP)  
Dialogue between  groups and indi viduals  with different perspectives  can identify  areas  of 
common  ground and potential  options for improved collaboration.  People with  SUD  
often move back  and forth between  harm  reduction  programs and SUD programs. 
Dialogue between  administrators  from both  groups can  make this experience smoother  
for program participants,  wherever  they  are provided. During the  overdose epidemic,  a 
range of health  and social  service providers, peer  recovery support organizations, first  
responders, and hospitals  launched  innovative pilot programs. The last  five years have 
seen the expansion of recovery community  organizations and a variety  of treatment 
providers engaging with  PWUD at  different stages  of their  SUD and recovery journeys. 
At the same time,  the connectivity  between  
incarceration  settings  and behavioral health  
providers is  growing. These experiences  
should inform the dialogue.  ONDCP,  
HHS,  and DOJ  should organize 
discussions between  harm reduction, 
treatment,  and recovery groups and 
disseminate principles highlighting where 
common  ground was  identified.  
C. Encourage the coordinated use of federal grant funds for harm reduction. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA; ONDCP)  
Many  harm reduction services  are eligible  
for federal funding through states.  
However, most  states  have , to date, 
dedicated  only limited amounts of their 
prevention and treatment federal grant 
funds to  SSPs and other harm reduction initiatives.  There may  be obstacles  to such  
funding, such  as record-keeping  or other  federal  or state  laws  that impede distributing  
grant funds to  harm reduction organizations.  HHS  and DOJ  should identify  and address 
federal barriers and issue  guidance to  improve comprehensive community -based  harm  
reduction programs’ access  to federal  grant  funds, including for health  screening and 
linkage to care not just for SUD  treatment  both for any identified  health  issue.  Further, 
HHS  and DOJ  should review  existing  technical assistance and training  programs to  
ensure that they have  the expertise and capacity  to serve those interested  in expanding 
comprehensive harm  reduction services,  including both non-profit groups and state and 
local agencies.  HHS  should also  assess how to  better  understand the  share of federal 
grant funds that are dedicated  to harm reduction.   
D. C
onsult with international partners on harm reduction programs. (Agencies 
Involved: DOS; ONDCP; USAID) 
In addition  to the important work and research  conducted inside the  United  States,  the 
international community  has learned  much  about harm reduction initiatives  over the past  
two decades  or more.  It is important to  highlight that  just as within  the United  States  “Abstinence isn’t wrong, and it is a deeply 
desired goal for many drug users, but there 
are changes a person can accomplish 
whether they stop using or not. The hallmark 
of harm reduction models is a combination 
of respect for the customer, non -judgmental 
stances, compassion, empathy and 
practicality.”  
—Edith Springer1  
Springer E. No. 15 - Winter 2003, Harm Reduct ion 
Communication. Issuu. 
https://issuu.com/harmreduction/docs/hrc_2003_wint
er_editedtoc . Published January 1, 2003. Accessed 
September 2, 2021.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  44 there  is a wide  range  of variation  in defining what  is described  as harm  reduction, this  is 
also true internationally.  Some  countries  have  a strong public  posture  against  harm  
reduction, yet  may  widely  distribute naloxone. Although U.S.  laws  and traditions  may  
differ from  those  of international  partners,  consultations  with  those  partners  and a review  
of the  research  literature associated  with  their  efforts  can inform  the development  of U.S.  
programs, including  by identifying  barriers  to program  expansion and fair  and equitable  
access  to services.  The United  States  should learn  what  we can from  the successes  and 
challenges  associated  with  developing and  sustaining  international  harm  reduction 
initiatives.  The Department  of State , ONDCP  and HHS  should collaborate on a 
consultation  process  to hear  the views  of international  partners  and share  existing  
international  resources  as appropriate.  
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  45 Substance  Use Disorder Treatment  
According to  the 2020 National  Survey on  Drug Use  and Health  (the National  Survey),2 40.3 
million  people  aged  12 or older  had a past-year  substance  use disorder (SUD).160 Among these,  
70.3-percent  (or 28.3 million  people)  had a past year  alcohol  use disorder, 45.7-percent  (or 18.4 
million  people) had a  past year  illicit  drug use disorder, and 16-percent  (or 6.5 million  people) 
had both an  alcohol  use disorder and an illicit  drug use  disorder.161 This  survey also shows  that,  
in 2020, among the 41.1 million people who needed treatment only 2.7 million  (6.5- percent)  of 
received  treatment  received  treatment  at a specialty  treatment  facility  in the past year .162 This 
disparity in unmet needs of SUD is known as the “treatment gap.”  
Substant ial federal funding in recent years has expanded and improve d treatment  services ; 
however, access  to diagnostic  and treatment  opportunities  do not  exist  in the same manner that  
they do for other chronic  illnesses  (e.g., the  rate of undiagnosed diabetes  is about  39-percent).163 
Research  shows  that more  than  95-percent  of people  identified  in the 2020 National  Survey as  
meeting  criteria for SUD  who  did not  seek  treatment  felt they did not need  treatment.164 Another 
3-percent  of those  individuals thought  they  should get  treatment  but did not try to get it.165  
SUDs  including alcohol,  prescription and illicit  drug use  disorders  are medical  conditions166 that 
respond to  evidence-based  treatments  (EBTs).167,168,169 EBTs  have scientific evidence supporting 
the effectiveness of the treatments , and may  be pharmacotherapies,  such  as methadone  (for 
opioid use disorder, or OUD ) or naltrexone (used for both OUD and alcohol  use disorder), or 
evidence -based therapies,  such  as contingency management.  It is clear  that if we were  to 
appropriately screen,  diagnose, and treat  individuals  with  SUD  similarly  to chronic  conditions 
we would be  able to significantly  reduce  mortality  and several  aspects  of morbidity  associated  
with substance  use. As such, the  more  people  who  are treated,  the fewer  lives  will be lost.  
Treating  more  people  who  have  SUD  is one of the  highest  drug policy priorities.   
Certain  factors  are associated  with  an elevated  risk of overdose  for people  with  cocaine,  
methamphetamine,  other  stimulant,  or OUD  (or a  combination  of these)  such  as experiencing  
homelessness,170 injecting  drugs,171 having a  prior history of non-fatal  overdose,172 using non-
prescribed benzodiazepines,173 and detoxification  without  follow -up medication  treatment  (in 
people who use opioids ).174 Additionally,  overdose  is the highest  risk factor for death  among 
people  leaving  incarceration.175,176 Geographic  and other barriers  to accessing  services  can 
confer vulnerability  and even  differ based  on race.177 Studies  have  shown racial  disparity in  
naloxone  prescribing and delivery is  a health  inequity  that must  be addressed.178 Treatment  for 
high-risk  populations  is especially  important. Evidence-based  treatments  have  been  shown to  
reduce  overdose  risk and mortality.179 However, people  of color, pregnant  people and individuals 
with children may  find it difficult  to access  or complete treatment due  to the barriers  erected  by 
some  social  determinants  of health.180,181,182 Pregnant and postpartum individuals experience 
additional barriers given the lack of integration between OB/Gyn care and SUD treatment. Some  
individuals  live in treatment  deserts  without  any treatment  at all or with  treatment  too distant to 
be accessible via available or affordable transportation.183 Finally,  while the  recent  overdose  
epidemic began  as a problem  predominately  in White people  related  to the oversupply of 
prescription opioids, overdose  rates  have  begun climbing  in people  of color. 184,185 
 
2 These  numbers  do not include  people  in institutional settings  like prisons,  jails,  dormitories , or hospitals,  and they 
also do not count  individuals  who are experiencing  homelessness,  leading  to an undercount  of people  who may 
benefit  from  treatment  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  46 Neighborhoods  with  smaller  White populations  may  have  less access  to certain  treatments  (e.g., 
buprenorphine).186 Other  underserved areas  include  rural  counties,  Tribal communities , and 
states  that thus far have chosen not to  expand Medicaid .3 
EBTs  can improve  outcomes  but are not as widely  available as  they  need  to be.187 Research  has 
shown that  for OUDs , the U.S.  Food and Drug Administration  (FDA)  approved medications 
most effectively reduce overdose mortality, increase abstinence, and improve quality o f life.188 
Research with office-based buprenorphine has shown that  adding additional behavioral  therapy  
sometimes  does  not improve  outcomes.189,190 For OUDs related to prescription opioids , research  
reported that  medicine managed  by a  prescriber can  produce  abstinence outcomes  as good as  
medication  plus  a very robust  psychosocial  evidence-based  treatment.191 Recognizing the overall 
effectiveness of FDA  approved MOUD , they should be  accessible to  any individual  with  an 
OUD regardless  of the  availability  of, or their  willingness  to participate in, additional  therapy  
except where that participation is mandated by regulation . 
People  with  SUD  often face  prejudice, stigma,  and discrimination,  and this  especially  affects  
Black  individuals.192 Stigmatizing  attitudes  towards drug use and people who use drugs (PWUD) 
exist  throughout  our society,  including  in health  care.193 One  study found that PWUD were 
discouraged from accessing medical care because they  do not  trust  health  care  providers  to 
maintain  their  privacy  from  law enforcement.194 We must  continue  to ensure  privacy  protections  
for people  in treatment  while  removing stigma in  health  care to  enhance patient  engagement  in 
treatment.195,196 Systems  engineering and behavioral  health  research  suggest  that a focus  on 
validation  and elements  of process  improvement  science  are critical  for engagement  in 
treatment.197,198,199 
Research  shows  that people  with  SUD are  viewed  more  negatively  than  people  with  physical  or 
other mental disorders .200,201 When  the subject  of a vignette  was referred to  as a “substance 
abuser”  rather  than  as a “person having a  substance  use disorder,”  even  highly trained  SUD  and 
mental  health  clinicians  were  significantly  more  likely  to assign  blame and believe that  an 
individual  should be  subjected  to punitive  (e.g., jail  sentence)  rather  than therapeutic  
measures.202 Blame is  counterproductive because  many  factors  other  than  individual  decision -
making  impact  whether a  person tries  a drug or develops  SUD.  Adverse  Childhood Experiences  
(ACEs), like growing up in  a home  with  a parent  with  SUD  increases  the risk for developing 
SUD.203 To increase the number of people  in treatment,  societal  attitudes  towards  people  with  
SUD  must  change. The U.S Preventive Services Task force recently recommended screening 
adults for unhealthy substance use as a Grade B recommendation.204 Members of the health , 
child welfare and justice systems  should receive training  to recognize SUD  as a medical  
condition like diabetes  or cancer.  Practitioners  and support  staff  should receive training to  serve  
these individuals.  Finally,  attitudes  more  broadly about  people  in need  of treatment  can change  
but this likely  only will  happen if  individuals  feel safe to speak  up.  
Treatment  is effective and an estimated 23 million  people  in this country are  in recovery.205 
However, additional  work is  necessary  to eliminate the unmet need for evidence-based SUD 
treatment . To meet  the Strategy ’s stated  treatment  goals, including  increased  access  to quality  
treatment,  reduced stigma,  dedicated  interventions  for the  most  vulnerable, and a  trained  
 
3 The Patient  Protection  and Affordable  Care  Act (ACA,  P.L. 111-148, as amended)  extended  Medicaid  eligibility  to 
all adults  under  age 65 with incomes  below  133 percent  of the federal  poverty level.  However,  the June 2012 
National  Federation  of Independent  Business (NFIB)  v. Sebelius  Supreme  Court  decision  effectively  made the 
expansion optional  for states.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  47 workforce  are necessary.  In addition,  novel  approaches  such  as the use of technology206 to 
facilitate entrance and retention  in treatment  must  also be supported. Federal  agencies  must  
support  efforts  nationwide to  identify  people  most  at risk of overdose, expand access  to 
evidence -based  treatments,  improve  reimbursement  models,  and build the  workforce  and 
infrastructure  needed so  more  people  can enter  long term recovery.  
Principle 1: Improve Treatment Engagement by Meeting 
People Where They Are   
It is imperative to  find ways  to identify  and engage  people  with  SUD  into treatment  that will 
benefit  them.  Medical  practitioners  routinely screen  for and treat  other  conditions  that have  few 
if any obvious  symptoms  (e.g., diabetes),  and SUD  should be  no different. Primary care 
providers  should be  at the forefront  of screening  for SUD.  To do that  they must  be equipped to  
routinely screen,  assess,  and treat  SUD.  Technological  supports  (such as screening  remind ers) 
can be of help  as providers  incorporate  and deliver  such  services.   
Engagement  opportunities  in locations  where  people  who  use drugs (PWUD) spend time is 
essential.  Hospitals,  syringe  services  programs  (SSPs, discussed  in detail  in the previous  
chapter), infectious  disease  clinics,  and health  departments  are all ideal  locations  to conduct  
screening  and improve  engagement  rates.  People  with  SUD  encounter law enforcement  in 
multiple settings.  Programs  that partner with law  enforcement  to divert  and deflect  appropriate 
individuals away from the justice system and into  treatment  and prevent  incarceration  without 
negatively impacting public safety are  important.  
Making treatments  more  accessible for people  with  different  needs  is essential  to increasing  
treatment  engagement.  For example,  housing for people  with  SUD  who  are experiencing  
homelessness,  or providing childcare for children of a  parent  in treatment  may decrease  barriers  
to treatment  participation  and ultimately  help  more  individuals  enter  recovery.207,208 
Transportation is  also a significant  barrier  to treatment,  particularly  in rural  areas,  where  
treatment  services  may  not exist  and individuals  must  travel  distances  for treatment  but lack  
public  or reliable transportation.  
The “Treatment  Cascade” concept  suggests  that the more  individuals  are successfully  diagnosed, 
entering  treatment  and receiving  tailored  evidence -based  treatment,  the more  people  who will 
enter  long term recovery.209 Unfortunately, as the figure below  demonstrates , the U.S.  has gaps  
in these rates  and needs  to radically  increase them  starting  with  the percentage diagnosed.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  48 Figure : Hypothetical  substance  use disorders  cascade of care for US  population 12+, 2020. SUD  
= substance  use disorders210,211  
 
A. Implement a national case -finding initiative. (Agencies Involved: DOD; HHS/CMS, 
HRSA, SAMHSA; VA/VHA; ONDCP)  
A medical  provider screening,  assessing,  and then  recommending  treatment  to a patient  
especially  coupled  with  feed back  concerning the  health  effects  and risks  of ongoing use 
can raise awareness  and motivation  for change.  All sectors  should be  involved including  
state,  county and city  health  departments;  clinics  that offer testing  for HIV/Hepatitis  C 
and sexually  transmitted  diseases;  crisis centers, emergency  departments;  and hospital  
trauma units.  All patients  who  meet  screening thresholds  should have  an assessment  and 
efforts  should be  made to  engage  that patient  in appropriate  treatment.  Agency  principals  
should engage  with  national  stakeholder  organizations  and establish  this as a standard  of 
practice,  and all  federal  agencies  that include providers who treat SUD  should fully 
implement  case-finding, assessment,  and primary care  feedback  in their  primary care 
patient  population by 2024.  
B. Scale up primary care screening technology and computerized brief interventions to 
promote treatment entry. (Agencies Involved: DOD; DOJ/BOP; HHS/HRSA, IHS, NIH; VA/VHA)  
During the COVID -19 pandemic many of us have gotten used to being screened for 
symptoms by providers at the start of medical visits. Use of screening including tech -
enabled s creening  tools  and non- judgmental  brief interventions  like the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse ’s (NIDA)  “Video  Doctor”
212 program  and other  technology assisted  
motivational  interviewing  (TAMI)  tools  can help  screen  people  with  SUD  and may 
motivate some to attend  treatment.  These approaches may reduce the need to train 
providers to do screening. Approaches like these should be  widely  deployed.213Providers 
should link those who screen positive to substance use disorder assessment and then 
treatment if they have substance use disorders.   

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  49 C. Support engagement through “low -threshold” or “low barrier to entry” settings.  
(Agencies Invol ved: HHS/SAMHSA; DOD, VA/VHA)  
“Low -threshold”  programs  that make  it relatively  easy  to get started  or participate in 
treatment  can include hospital  clinics,  telemedicine treatment  initiation,  mobile 
methadone programs  or other programs  which  do not  require  people to “jump  through 
hoops”  to start  in care.  Although drug use  has been  historically  grounds  for dismissal  
from  some  treatment  programs, providers  are learning that flexibility  can be offered to 
accommodate a  person who  might  be willing  to stop  opioid use  but not all other drugs. 
Education  about  other  drug use  and the  need  to take precautions  when  using 
benzodiazepines  and buprenorphine, for example,  may be an area that  a provider 
negotiates  with  a patient  because the benefits  of being on buprenorphine  outweigh the  
risks  of co -use.  Agencies  should review  their  policies  to allow  greater  flexibility  and site 
treatment  access  where  people already  live or spend time such as in health care for the 
homeless programs or in SSPs. 
Principle 2: Improving Treatment Quality Including  
Payment Reform  
Ample research  shows  that people  with  cocaine and methamphetamine use  disorder respond to  
specific psychosocial  and behavioral  treatments.214,215,216,217 Also,  research  shows  that the Food  
and Drug Administration  (FDA)  approved  MOUD save lives218 and can  outperform  treatment  
without  medication.219,220 Thus, they  should be  accessible to  any individuals  with  OUD 
regardless  of whether  that individual  has access to, or chooses to participate in  psychosocial  or 
behavioral  treatment  unless the behavioral treatment is required by regulation . 
A number of policy  barriers  prevent  access  to the most  efficacious  treatments  for SUD.  To vastly  
increase the percentage of people needing  treatment  who  participate in  evidence-based  treatment  
in a given year,  it is important  to make  evidence-based  treatment  as accessible and available as 
primary care.  It is also essential  that we prioritize utilizing  treatment  dollars  efficiently  by 
recognizing treatment dollars are limited, but the need is vast.  Wherever  possible , inexpensive  
oral methadone  and sublingual  buprenorphine  should be the backbone of our treatment system 
for caring for people with opioid us e disorder, and selected far more  often because of  their  
relative safety,  efficacy,  and low  cost.   
In addition, approaches such as motivational incentives, which utilize tangible rewards to 
reinforce positive behaviors such as abstinence from opioids and to motivate and sustain treatment adherence in patients who suffer from SUD, should be more widely available. These incentives are an integral part of protocol -driven and evidenced -based contingency management 
programs and can be offered through smartphone applications and smart debit card technology designed to provide comprehensive and personalized treatment for SUD (including, for opioid, stimulant, alcohol, and nicotine use disorders).  These programs include tools that enable, for 
example, automated appointment reminders and attendance verification, automated medication reminders, drug, alcohol, and tobacco/nicotine testing, self-guided cognitive behavioral therapy, and recovery coaching.  
In addition, prescription digital therapeutics are software-based disease treatments intended to prevent or treat a disease that are regulated by the US Food and Drug Administration. For 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  50 example, one prescription digital therapeutic authorized in 2018 delivers cognitive behavioral 
therapy for individuals receiving buprenorphine for opioid use disorder. 221 Further exploration 
of such digital therapeutics and other health technology in the form of digital screening, 
assessment and treatment could help increase services for a wide array of patients.  
Payment reform  is also essential.  Insufficient insurance coverage,  provider reimbursement rates  
that do not cover activities  required to  sustain  a practice,  and non-compliance with federal parity  
laws requiring certain insurance plans to provide comparable coverage of  physical and 
behavioral health services all  may  impact  access  to treatment as  well  as whether  people can  
succeed  in treatment.  Research  shows lower  overdose rates  in Medicaid  expansion states.222 
Although the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment  Block  Grants (Block Grant)  as well  as 
new money from Congress through the  21st Century Cures Act  and State Opioid Response (SOR) 
provide for certain services in all States (Medicaid expansion and non-expansion), these sources of funding do not replace the more comprehensive access to care through Medicaid which would otherwise be offered if all States expanded coverage via opportun ities offered through the 
Affordable Care Act. Reform is  needed  so that those treating  groups most  at risk receive  funding, 
and so  providers can  make  a business case  for treating  more of these patients  and for accepting  
insurance.  
A. Provide technical assist ance and support to Congress to remove outdated 
requirements that limit access to MOUD.  (Agencies Involved: HHS/FDA, SAMHSA; 
DOJ/DEA; ONDCP)   
The Office of  National  Drug Control Policy  (ONDCP)  will work with  interagency  
partners to  provide technical assistance and support to Congress in order to eliminate the 
outdated requirement s and overregulation that prevents widespread use  of buprenorphine 
products for OUD treatment  by licensed  medical  treatment providers.  
B. Explore linkages to training on controlled substance prescribing to DEA registration or another prescriber requirement.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; 
HHS/FDA, SAMHSA; ONDCP)  
ONDCP  will work with  interagency  partners  to explore linkages to training  on the use  of 
controlled sub stances  for both  pain  and addiction  treatment  by exploring options to  either  
(1) require minimum training as part of the  Drug Enforcement Administration  (DEA)  
registration  or (2) create a requirement for training  through the O pioid  Analgesic R isk 
Evaluation  Mitigation  Strategy  (REMS), pursuing a legislative solution if necessary. 
C. E
xplore reimbursement for evidence-based motivational incentives such as 
contingency management, and explore emerging evidence for digital screening, 
assessment, and treatment (digital therapeutics). (Agencies Involved: HHS/ASPE, CMS; VA/VHA, DOD) 
Coverage for the provision of motivational  incentives could be considered within  health 
plans. This will require considering billing codes and setting reimbursement parameters. Coverage should be explored for the incentives  themselves , as well as for the provider 
costs for administering them and the digital tools that help enable the treatment (including FDA-cleared and evidence-based approaches) . Revisions to e xisting  payment  
bundl es could be assessed by the Department of Health  and Human  Services  (HHS)  
payers to  include these programs alongside MOUD and psychotherapy, as patients with 
OUD and other SUDs may need concurrent treatment. If needed, HHS, VHA, and DOD 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  51 should request  authority  from  Congress  to cover the costs of motivational incentives and 
reimburse providers who work with patients using incentives and digital services for 
contingency management . 
D. Incentive -Based Treatment using section 1115 Medicaid Demonstrati on Authority. 
(Agencies Involved: HHS/ASPE, CMS, NIH, SAMHSA) 
States  may apply to the  Center s for Medicare  & Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  for Medicaid 
section 1115 demonstration programs  to test innovative  programs  that may not otherwise 
be eligible for Medicaid reimbursement .  
E. Treatment Navigation and Entry Assistance. (Agencies Involved: HHS/CMS, NIH, 
SAMHSA; ONDCP) 
Parents , caregivers, and family  members  may not understand how  to access  care. To help 
individuals navigate options, providers and health care systems can be helpful in making 
referrals. However, these services are often not reimbursable under most plans. Requiring primary care  providers  to be responsible  for ensuring patients  access  care without  
reimburseme nt to support care coordination and management can  result  in referrals  to 
treatment  that patients do not ultimately access  without a navigator to hand a patient off 
to a treatment provider . For  these reasons,  insured patient’s  insurance  plans  should take  a 
more  active role in treatment  access  navigation,  and monitor this coverage  by virtue  of 
their awareness  of in - and out -of-network participation  by providers  in their  plans. 
Federal  agencies  and external  stakeholders,  including state governments  and national  
organizations, should engage  with  insurance  companies  to discuss the  increased  
involvement  of insurance  case managers  to help  patients  navigate treatment  options  and 
arrange  for care.  Reimbursement for patient navigation services should be resear ched.   
F. Review Medicare reimbursement rates.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/ DEA; HHS/CMS,) 
The level of reimbursement  can affect providers' decision to furnish services to  patients  
covered under Medicare.
223 At least  one study  of commercial claims databases shows  that 
psychiatrists  receive lower  reimbursement  relative to  other  medical  specialists  in network 
but higher reimbursement  when  out of network for patients  with  private  insurance .224 
Moreover, people  with  SUD  may have  more medically complex  conditions  that require 
more time and resources to treat . Standard reimbursement  models centered  around a  15-
minute office  visit  may be unlikely  to adequately  reflect the resources needed for treating 
patients with SUD , many  of whom  have  comorbid conditions, and few  resources.  The  
federal  government  should evaluate the  most  effective strategies  for addressing concerns  
regarding reimbursement  rates  in order to  encourage maximum participation  among SUD 
treatment  providers  in health  plans.  
G. Make methadone more accessible for patients in federal health care systems.  
(Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP; HHS/IHS; VA/VHA)  
Many  federal  treatment  providers  are ineligible to  offer methadone  to treat  their patients  
with OUD because they  do not  work in federally  regulated  opioid treatment  programs  
(OTPs).  However, these systems  should be  able to offer the full complement  of 
medication  to treat  OUD. Federal  health  service providers  should not  be hampered  by 
regulations  meant  for the  public  and private  sectors,  especially  when  federal  departments  
have  direct  control  over  the health care professionals they  employ. The Administration 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  52 should explore change s to the  Controlled Substances  Act to permit  federal  health  service  
practitioners to  offer opioid treatment  with  all forms  of MOUD outside  the OTP  system.  
H. Review and update withdrawal management programs and policies to be followed 
by treatment programs and service s. (Agencies Involved: DOD; DOJ/DEA; 
HHS/CMS, IHS, SAMHSA; VA/VHA)  
Research  shows  that withdrawal  management  programs  (formerly referred to as a 
“detoxification” programs  for OUD) can  actually  raise the risk of overdose  death  because  
the patient  participates  in treatment  only for  a short  period of time,  loses  opioid tolerance,  
and is  not protected  by medication  in the event  of relapse.225 Withdrawal  management  
should never be  considered  a complete episode  of care.  If patients  do not  desire to  be on 
maintenance medication,  withdrawal  should be  managed  according  to standards  of care  
using medications  to help  wean  patients  from  the drugs  on which  they  are dependent, and 
the patient  should be  transitioned  to appropriate  additional  treatment services . 
Withdrawal  management  service provider should arrange  for additional  care as needed  
including scheduling  appointments, arranging transportation and other  “warm  handoff”  
type of logistics  arrangements,  as well  as overdose  education  and naloxone  access.  
Agencies  should review  and update  their  policies  to include  these services  in an effort  to 
decrease fatalities  associated  with  withdrawal  management  programs. 
I. Review and revise regulations to support low -barrier buprenorphine programs. 
(Agencies Involved: HHS/SAMHSA)  
Low-barrier to  entry buprenorphine  programs  are controversial  in part because  they  
involve  letting  patients  start  treatment  without  complete abstinence from  other 
drugs.226,227 To help  mitigate this  risk, the  regulations  and guidance  to providers  for 
buprenorphine  treatment  outside  of Federal  Opioid Treatment  Programs  should be  
revised  to address  needed  risk mitigation  like issuing  naloxone, educating  the patient  
about  the dangers  of benzodiazepines,  and recomm ending monitoring to prevent  
overdose. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  53  
J. Review and update opioid treatment program regulations. (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/DEA; HHS/SAMHSA)  
Existing  federal  regulations for opioid treatment with  methadone pose barriers like 
requiring people under 18 to  “fail  first” on non-medication  treatment  before starting  
methadone.228 They  also do not require overdose prevention education, access  to 
naloxone, or training  on naloxone’s use.  ONDCP  is currently supporting a review  of 
these regulations by an  independent organization.  Once  that is completed,  and if 
warranted and approved by the interagency, Federal  Opioid Treatment  Program 
regulations should be updated to  permit  safer  and better  access  to methadone treatment 
for OUD, and to  require overdose prevention educ ation  and naloxone training.  Regulators 
should consider allowing  methadone dispensing from pharmacies  as is done in  the United  
Kingdom because of their greater  accessibility  in most  communities  relative to  OTPs.  Veteran Health Administration’s Contingency Management “Incentives” Intervention 
Contingency management interventions use incentives in the form of tangible goods or 
services for completing certain treatment related activities or for maintaining abstinence. 
They are among the most effective treatments for stimulant use disorder but they are rarely 
used outside of research settings.1,2 The Department of Veterans Affairs supports contingency 
management  (CM) incentive interventions by offering incentives linked to drug negative 
urine samples which patients enrolled in treatment can then spend in the VA hospital 
canteen.3 To be effective at engaging patients with anhedonia, a condition of disinterest 
similar to depression that can occur following stimulants cessation, contingency management 
interventions should offer incentives at values shown effective in research trials or risk 
failure.. Much developmental research has been conducted on ways to decrease the overall 
cost of incentives while maintaining the effects and new models like prize drawing protocols 
have been shown to be cost-effective.4 The VA is the first organization to implement this 
evidence-based treatment on a wide-scale. Its experience can serve as a model for other 
health care systems interested in using incentives to treat stimulant use disorder, particularly 
its training and supervision.  
Sources:  
1. Higgins ST, Kurti AN, Davis DR. Voucher -Based Contingency Management is Efficacious but Underutilized in Treating 
Addictions. Perspect Behav Sci. 2019;42(3):501- 524. Published 2019 Jul 29. doi:10.1007/s40614- 019-00216 -z 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6768932/pdf/40614_2019_Article_216.pdf   
2. Rash CJ, DePhilippis D. Considerations for Implementing Contingency Management in Substance Abuse Treatment 
Clinics: The Veterans Affairs Initiative as a Model. Perspect Behav Sci. 2019;42(3): 479-499. Published 2019 Jun 26. 
doi:10.1007/s40614- 019-00204 -3 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6768930/pdf/40614_2019_Article_204.pdf  
3. Petry NM, DePhilippis D, Rash CJ, Drapkin M, McKay JR. Nationwide dissemination of contingency management: the 
Veterans Administration initiative. Am J Addict. 2014;23(3):205- 210. doi:10.1111/j.1521-
0391.2014.12092.x https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3986725/pdf/nihms507133.pdf   
4. Olmstead TA, Petry NM. The cost-effectiveness of prize -based and voucher -based contingency management in a 
population of cocaine - or opioid -dependent outpatients. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;102(1- 3):108 -115. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.02.005 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2679219/pdf/nihms99385.pdf   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  54 Principle 3: Supporting  At-Risk Populations  
To substantially  decrease  overdose  deaths  and the  burden from SUD , we must  strategically  
address  the barriers  for treatment  among those  groups  that are most  at risk for overdose  deaths  
and other negative consequences.  One  example is  individuals  who  are incarcerated  or reentering 
after incarceration - a disproportionate  number of whom  are Black,  Indigenous  or People  of Color 
(BIPOC).229 Although it  would be  ideal  to treat  people  before  or, where  appropriate, as an 
alternative to  arrest,  bringing treatment  “behind  the walls” is  an underutilized  opportunity to  treat  
people  with SUD.  
 Certain  populations  could benefit  from  treatment  but it may  be close to  impossible for them to  
participate without  first having met  their  needs  for shelter,  childcare,  or other health  issues 
resulting  from  drug use  like overdose  or infections. We  also must  continue  to maintain  strong 
privacy protections  for people  with  SUD  as we reform  treatment  so people  who  need  care will  
attend  without  fear of shame,  nor social  or legal  repercussions. Research has shown that people  
avoided treatment  over concerns  that providers  might  turn them  into law enforcement.230, 231 
Pregnant  people232 and parents may  avoid  seeking care and assistance out of fear  of being  
reported to  child  welfare.233  
A. Utilize federal grant mechanisms to support people most in need of treatment to 
include reimbursing for wrap around services.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP; 
HHS/CMS, NIH, SAMHSA; HUD; USDA)  
The Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block  Grant  and other relatively  new  
grant  programs  provide  money  to states  to offer payment  to certain  non-profit  treatment  
providers  to care for the  uninsured or under-insured, as  well  as to implement prevention  
services.  But treatment  needs  often extend  beyond simply  provider reimbursement  and 
should include support and reimburse for wrap  around services . The  Administration 
should examine ways  existing  grant  mechanisms  may  be better  utilized to best serve  
people  most  in need  of treatment  through the provision of safe,  child -friendly housing or 
by widening access  to cover  care of people  who  are incarcerated.  Use of federal  grant 
dollars  by for-profit  treatment  providers  who have significant capacity to provide services 
also should be  considered as a  more  widely  utilized  option. Changes  should consider  
availability of state Medicaid  dollars , opioid litigation  settlement  dollars, and the  
behavioral  health  infrastructure  so economically  vulnerable  and people  with  stimulant,  
opioid, and cocaine use  disorders  always  receive evidence-based  treatment  and wrap  
around social  support  services .  
B. Expand mobile units for MOUD including to prisons and jails.  (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/BOP, DEA, OJP; HHS/SAMHSA; VA/VHA; ONDCP)  
The DEA recently  published a  rule entitled  “Registration  Requirements  for Narcotic  
Treatment  Programs  with  Mobile  Components”234 that enables  OTPs to  deliver  MOUD 
treatment  to clients who are unable to access brick and mortar OTPs nearby. States  and 
federal  agencies  that have  not been  able  to start  their  own  OTPs should be  encouraged to  
invest  in these units  so they  may offer treatment  with  MOUD to  incarcerated  individuals  
and people  with  limited  transportation options. ONDCP should encourage states to 
consider whether state laws concerning mobile units hamper clinic’s ability to use this 
service so they may determine if changes are needed in the state.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  55 C. Arrange for treatmen t funding for people who are incarcerated.  (Agencies Involved: 
HHS/ASPE, CMS, SAMHSA; DOJ/BOP)  
Currently by law,  states  generally4 may  not spend federal Medicaid  dollars on health  care 
for individuals who  are incarcerated,  under the “inmate exclusion.” The federal  
government could convene an interagency  working group to  identify the best  way  to 
provide SUD services  for people in  state prisons and jails,  and then work to advance 
policies that address the lack of access for SUD services for incarcerated individuals.    
D. Expand evidence -based treatment in federal prison.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP, 
DEA; ONDCP)  
The federal  prison system  needs to  expand its  treatment  progra mming  so evidence-based  
behavioral therapy and all medications  to treat  addiction  are available to incarcerated 
persons who use drugs. Choice of treatment should be based  on provider and patient  
agreement,  and medication  access  should not be contingent on additional therapy  
participation  (as medication  alone may be lifesaving). The federal government should 
work to  help  coordinate treatment  options so  the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) may  
offer all  evidence-based  treatments, including all MO UDs approved by the FDA. It also  
should work to  support individuals in its custody so that they may participate 
meaningfully  in treatment , which may include providing MOUD, individual 
psychotherapy or counseling appointments in lieu of group counseling, or implementing 
other measures to enhance their privacy and confidentiality.  
E. Pilot methadone programs in federal prisons to leverage telemedicine and bureau of prison pharmacists.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP, DEA; HHS/NIH; ONDCP) 
The BOP  is a unique treatment  environment because patients  reside in  prisons, and much  
of the practice of medicine in these facilities involves dispensing chronically -needed  
medication  to patients  on the  premises  under close observation. The BOP  permits  
pharmacists  to perform duties that advanced practice nurses and physicians complete 
outside of federal prison. However, these pharmacists  are not  allowed  to store and 
dispense methadone to  treat addiction.  The executive branch could explore options to  
allow BOP  pharmacists  to dispense methadone prescribed by BOP physicians using 
telemedicine visit  induction  as an exception  to the Controlled Substances  Act statute 
requiring dispensing in OTPs.  
F. A
rrange for treatment for people leaving incarceration. (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/BOP, OJP; HHS/ASPE, CMS, HRSA, SAMHSA; VA/VHA)  
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)  allows reimbursement for transportation to 
treatment  for eligible veterans enrolled in the VA health care system.  However, few other 
health programs, systems, or insurers provide a similar benefit. Having treatment available and transportation to that treatment upon release from incarceration is a common -sense way to help prevent overdose deat hs among people leaving 
incarceration.
235 Case  management to  connect people to  treatment and transportation 
upon release should be  an allowable cost  for program services reimbursement. 
 
4 The exceptions are that Medicaid  dollars are available for an inmate  experiencing  an inpatient stay of 24 hours or 
more at a health  care facility.  See https://www.medicaid.gov/sites/default/files/Federal- Policy -
Guidance/Downloads/sho16007.pdf  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  56 Principle 4: Build the Treatment Workforce and 
Infrastructure  
Government estimates  suggest the  nation’s behavioral health, including the SUD, workforce will  
continue to experience staffing shortages,236 and we  need  to address future workforce needs  for 
several  behavioral health  occupations.237 Racial di sparities  in health  care utilization  may be 
partially  explained  by the  lack  of providers of similar  race  and ethnicity  as the populations being 
served.238 Hiring diverse practitioners who  reflect  the people and cultures  they  serve is  an 
important  workforce issue.239 Research  has shown that PWUD may  avoid health  systems,  
particularly  people who  inject  drugs,240 because they  are often  treated  poorly. Fear of 
discrimination and stigmatization  discourages people with  SUD from seeking  care and  
compromises  the care  they  receive when  they do seek  it. Training  all health  professionals about 
SUD as a medical condition could  improve the health  care experience for PWUD , and  
integrating  health  services  into organizations  frequented by PWUD could increase use  of health  
services  by this  population.241,242 As depicted  in the HHS  map243 below (Exhibit 1), the majority  
of counties  in the United  States  are experiencing shortages of mental health  professionals. The 
second HHS  map244 below (Exhibit 2) highlights areas  with  low or no access  to buprenorphine 
treatment  for OUD at  doctors’ offices. 
EXHIBIT  1     EXHIBIT  2 
 
SUD treatment  providers in  criminal  justice settings  are also severely  lacking. According to  the 
Bureaus of Justice Statistics,  in 2019 the US federal and state prison population was  1,430,800245 
and local  jails  reported about 734,500 inmates  at midyear  2019.246 According to the National 
Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, this is  a population in  which  an estimated  65-percent 
has an  active SUD,  most  of whom go untreated.247 
A. Expand Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics (CCBHCs) and SUD 
services in Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). (Agencies Involved: HHS/ASPE, HRSA, SAMHSA)  
Multiple points of entry to treatment  in communities  are required  to increase access  to 
treatment  services.  States  should explore establishing  additional Certified  Community 
Behavioral Health  Clinics  in places  with  greatest need  to ensure local  24-hour access  to 
SUD treatment  services  or linkage to  services.  Federal agencies  should work with  
stakeholders to  raise awareness  and help  improve uptake of these services , including 
access for law enforcement drop off and referral. Also,  Federally  Qualified  Health  
Centers (FQHCs), a core provider of health  services  to underserved populations, sho uld 

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  57 work to  provide  the full spectrum  of SUD  services.  Federal  agencies  should work with  
stakeholders  to raise awareness  and help  improve  uptake  of these services.   
B. Continue low -interest Federal loans for treatment program initiation in Rural 
Areas. (Agencies Involved: Treasury; USDA) 
Hospitals  and treatment  programs  wishing  to start  or expand SUD  treatment  services  
programs  in rural  areas  may  need  low-interest  loans  for brick and mortar  expansion and 
program  start -up funding. USDA Rural Development can provide support for 
infrastructure, equipment, and start -up costs for treatment services in rural areas through 
a variety of programs. Rural Development provides guaranteed loans  through lenders  to 
public bodies, non-profit organ izations, federally recognized American Indian Tribes, and 
for-profit businesses in communities with populations of 50,000 or less through the Rural 
Development Community Facilities and Business and Industry Guaranteed Loan programs covered under the OneRD  Guarantee Program. Direct loans and grants are 
available for government, non-profit, and tribal entities for projects in communities with populations of 20,000 or less through the Rural Development Community Facilities programs.  
Other support for treatme nt services includes funding for equipment and startup costs for 
treatment and workforce development through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine 
Program in communities of 20,000 or less. Additionally, utilities can obtain zero interest loans from the Rural Economic Development Loan and Grant program to relend to local businesses to support projects that create and retain employment in rural areas with a population of 50,000 or less. Funding for hospitals and other types of care facilities are common uses  of this program. Rural Development also administers the Delta Health Care 
Services Grant program that funds consortiums in the 252 counties and parishes in 
Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee in the Delta Region to develop healthcare services, health education programs, healthcare job training programs and the development and expansion of public health-related facilities. Additionally, the cooperative model provides a unique approach for healthcare and SUD  treatment, and Rural Development provides both financial and technical 
assistance support for cooperative development. For example, the Rural Cooperative Development Grant Program offers grants to nonprofit corporations and institutions of higher education to operate Rural Cooperative Development Centers that serve communities with a population of 50,000 or less. The Socially Disadvantaged Group Grants Program also supports technical assistance to socially disadvantaged groups through cooperatives and Cooperative Development Centers serving rural communities of 50,000 or less. 
With the variety of programs that can support treatment services and infrastructure, 
federal  agencies  should work with  stakeholders  to raise awareness  and help  increase use 
of these programs  to support treatment services . 
C. Prioritize Efforts to Build Capacity in the behavioral health workforce.  (Agency 
Involved: HHS/CDC, HRSA, SAMHSA)  
The Department of Health and Human Services should prioritize efforts to advance 
capacity building in  the behavioral  health  workforce  to be responsive  to the increasing  
mental  health  and SUD  workforce  needs  through programs  that provide  scholarships,  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  58 loan reimbursement,  and fellowships  in the behavioral health  professions to  increase  
workforce capacity.  This  should include continued support of the Addiction Medicine 
Fellowship  program. All  workforce recruitment efforts should be designed  to address 
equity, diversity  inclusion  and accessibility . 
D.  Develop addiction curriculum for medical, public health, and nursing schools.  
(Agencies Involved: HHS/HRSA, SAMHSA) 
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration ( SAMHSA ) and 
HRSA —in collaboration  with  the American  Association  of Medical Colleges (AAMC), 
the Association  of Schools and Programs of Public Health,  and the  American  Nurses 
Association —should establish  a core  curriculum on SUD studies  for all medical,  public 
health,  and nursing schools so  that every student is  educated  on SUD and has basic 
knowledge of strategies  to identify,  assess,  intervene,  and treat  addiction, as well  as 
support recovery. This  will build on work started  by AAMC  in 2019 working with  
medical  schools to  develop  core curriculum  to advance education al content related  to 
pain and addiction . To the extent  practicable,  HRSA  should consider including  this core 
curriculum as  a requirement for schools applying for fellowships and grants for licensed  
practitioners.  
E. Train nurses, psychologists, pharmacists and social workers to care for p eople with 
substance use disorders.  (Agencies Involved: HHS/HRSA, SAMHSA; ONDCP)  
The federal  government should work with  leadership  of these disciplines  to request that  
they set goals for tracking their  workforce’s engagement  in SUD treatment  and training  
for it.  These professionals engage with  people who  have SUD regularly. With  training, 
nurses, pharmacists  and psychologists who  prescribe may  also be in  position to  offer 
quality  treatment —including  MOUD—as  part of workforce expansion although new 
authorities  would be needed for these prescriber categories.   
F. Exami ne models for office-based buprenorphine treatment to address financial 
disincentives.  (Agency Involved: HHS)  
Research  suggests some  office-based  buprenorphine models  do not reimburse providers 
enough to  make a business case  for delivering care.248 Research reinforces that p ersistent 
provider workforce barriers to buprenorphine provision include insufficient training and 
education on opioid use disorder treatment, lack of institutional and clinician peer 
support, poor care coordination, provider stigma, inadequate reimbursement from private 
and public insurers, and regulatory hurdles to obtain the waiver needed to prescribe 
buprenorphine in non- addiction specialty treatment settings.249 The Administration 
should examine this  research  and consider developing models  that improve incentives to 
provide care.  
G. Extend telemedicine flexibilities across state lines.  (Agency Involved: DOJ/DEA; HHS)  
During the COVID-19 pandemic,  the DEA  temporarily  waived  the requirements  that 
providers be licensed  in the same  state as  a patient  whom they  serve via  telemedicine.  
Now,  many  providers offer treatment via  telemedicine to  patients  who  live nearby but  in 
another state.  However, at the end of the  pandemic,  this may  change.  Federal  agencies  
should work with  Congress to  establish  a mechanism with appropriate safeguards for 
providers to  engage in  controlled substance prescribing across state lines  by telemedicine, 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  59 and a ddress  licensing  and payment  obstacles  across  state lines  for professionals  and 
paraprofessionals  through federal  guidance/oversight/incentives  to encourage  states  to 
allow  interstate licensing  reciprocity  which would require  collaboration  with  states.   
H. Pursue opportunities to advocate for global capacity to respond to substance use 
disorders and related health needs by prioritizing training of the global drug prevention, treatment and recovery workforce.  (Agencies Involved: DOS; HHS; 
ONDCP)   
Executive  branch agencies  should advocate  through multinational organizations for 
increasing  global  capacity  to respond to  SUD  and related  unmet  health  needs  including  
by prioritizing training  of the global  workforce  consisting of drug prevention, treatment 
and recovery professionals . Federal  agencies  will work with  international  partners  to 
finalize the  development  of a universal  accreditation  system,  and encourage  adoption of 
the international  standards  on prevention and treatment.   
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  60 Building  a Recovery -Ready  Nation 
In 2010, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health  Services  Administration  (SAMHSA)  convened 
diverse recovery stakeholders  to develop  the following consensus working definition  of recovery 
from mental  illness and SUD:  “Recovery is  a process of change through which  individuals  
improve their  health  and wellness,  live a self -directed  life, and strive to  reach  their  full 
potential.” Participants  identified  four major  dimensions of recovery: home;  health; purpose; and 
community.250 These dimensions can  be viewed  as the four corners of the foundation upon 
which  a life in  recovery is built.   
Because recovery is a process, and not an event,  it generally  
begins before substance use  is stopped, continues  after  the 
cessation  of use,  can be sustained  through a return to  use, and 
may accommodate reduced levels  of use  when  these permit 
improvements in  health,  wellness,  and functioning. Recovery 
is measured  as a positive—by what  it brings, including 
improved quality  of life, a sense  of self -efficacy  and purpose, 
and improvements in  social  and emotional  functioning and 
wellbeing.  It is distinct  from both  abstinence and remission, 
which  are measured  by the absence of symptoms.   
Recovery may  be best  understood as  the process of building recovery capital,  the internal  and 
external resources upon which  individuals  can draw to  pursue, achieve,  sustain,  and enhance a 
life in  recovery.251,252,253 Examples  of internal recovery capital include knowledge, coping skills,  
resilience,  hope, and perseverance.  External  recovery capital includes  assets  such  as family,  a 
supportive community  of recovering  peers, treatment,  mutual aid  meetings  (e.g., A.A.,  N.A.,  
SMART  Recovery, Women  for Sobriety), transportation, housing, employment,  and income.  
Discrimination,  inequitable access  to resources and opportunities, and social  determinants  of 
health  all intersect  with  recovery capital and  should be considered concurrently. 
Americans  follow diverse trajectories  from SUD to  recovery or remission. In 2020, an  estimated  
29.2 million  Americans  aged  18 or  older reported a lifetime alcohol or other  drug (AOD)  
problem. Of  these,  21.2 million  (72 percent) identified  as in recovery or recovered from a 
substance use  problem. 254 A national study found that,  among people who  reported having 
resolved an  alcohol or other drug program, 45 percent participated  in mutual  aid groups, 28-
percent had  received  treatment,  and 22-percent had received  recovery support services  (RSS), 
including from recovery community  centers.255 A smaller  percentage of participants  in this study 
(46-percent) described  themselves  as “in recovery.” These data suggest that it is critical  not only  
to expand access  to treatment,  but to  understand the diverse characteristics,  trajectories  and needs 
of those whose journey from addiction  to recovery or remission  does not include treatment.  We 
must  understand these trajectories  and their  intersections  with  various systems  in order to  
identify  engagement  and other  intervention opportunities and develop strategies  to increase the  
percentage of Americans  with  SUD who  achieve recovery, to  shorten the duration and  severity  
of SUD,  and to  save  lives.  
RSS can  be instrumental in engaging individuals with  SUD and helping them navigate the  early  
stages  of recover y. Non -clinical  services  provided to  individuals with  or in  recovery from SUD,  
RSS are distinct from treatment  and can  be more flexibly sequenced  and delivered.  These 
services  are most  commonly  provided by individuals who  have lived  experience of addiction  and Recovery is  a process of 
change through which  
individuals improve their 
health  and wellness,  live a 
self-directed  life, and strive 
to reach  their full potential.   
- SAMHSA,  2010 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  61 recovery. When  that occurs, these services  are referred to  as peer  recovery support services  
(PRSS).   
While clinical  services  are based  primarily on the specialty  
training  and expertise of the practitioner, PRSS are anchored 
in experience of SUD  and recovery that is  supplemented  by 
training. Peer  specialists  work in  diverse settings  where they 
engage, link, and otherwise serve both  those  in recovery and 
those with  active SUD,  including  overdose survivors and 
others with  SUD in  emergency  departments,  those who  can be 
reached  through inpatient hospital and primary care settings,  
and through SSPs,  street  outreach programs, mobile clinics,  
drug court programs, and elsewhere.  
While they can be valuable components of clinical,  medical,  or other teams,  when  working 
through peer -led organizations such  as recovery community  organizations (RCOs), peers are not 
limited  to serving the patients  of a specific treatment  provider, can serve individuals  who are not 
in and have not  received  treatment,  and are not limited  by the length  of reimbursable treatment  
episodes. Peer  workers employed  by RCOs provide a bi-directional bridge between  formal 
systems  (e.g., SUD  treatment,  health  care,  child  welfare,  or criminal  justice systems)  and 
community -based  resources such  as family,  mutual  aid groups, housing, employment,  faith  
groups, and the broader recovery community.  Across systems,  sectors,  and settings,  peers play  
varied  roles, serving as  vital  connective tissue linking diverse points on the  intervention 
continuum.  
Recovery takes  place at the family/caregiver  and community  levels  as well  as the individual 
level.  A recovery-ready  community  recognizes  the unique humanity and potential contributions 
of every person affected  by addiction, not  only those who  are currently in  or seeking  recovery. 
Such communities  embark on a community-wide  healing  and recovery process reducing the toll 
of substance use  and helping  more of their  members  achieve recovery and become productive, 
contributing citizens.  By building recovery -ready communities,  schools, and workplaces, and by 
fostering increased  public health/ public safety  partnerships, we  will build a healthier, more 
equitable,  and more resilient nation. This  is a key goal of Biden -Harris Administration  drug 
policy  in both  the supply and demand reduction  arenas.  
We are steadily  learning more about recovery’s dimensions and diverse trajectories,  how 
recovery relates  to remission  and abstinence,  what  kinds of RSS may  be effective,  and whom 
they may  most  benefit.  However, our scientific understanding in this domain is  still emerging. 
Targeted,  actionable research  is needed  to inform policy and resource allocation  decisions  in the 
recovery domain.  
Available scientific evidence suggests that  common  forms of RSS can  be beneficial . For 
example,  positive outcomes  are associated  with  receipt  of services  through recovery community  
centers  (RCCs), local  peer  service hubs that  can serve  as drop-in  centers  for people in or seeking  
recovery, and through which  recovery coaching and other  services  are available.  RCCs can  offer 
a range of services,  including  relapse prevention, housing and employment support, social  and 
recreational  activities,  and other services.256 One  study found that receipt  of services  at an RCC 
is associated  with  greater  recovery duration  and improved psychological well -being and quality  
of life.  The authors noted that  RCCs played  a unique role that  differed from those of treatment  
and mutual aid  groups: They  facilitated  recovery capital acquisition, “thereby  enhancing  Peers  play  diverse roles  
across systems,  sectors,  and 
settings,  providing a vital  
connective tissue  linking 
diverse points on the  
intervention  continuum. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  62 functioning and quality  of life.” This  study  found that RCCs served people facing  multiple 
challenges; nearly half  of RCC participants  had a high school diploma or less, close to half had 
an annual household income of $10,000 or  less,  over 80-percent reported use  of multiple 
substances,  and close to half reported a lifetime psychiatric diagnosis. Notably,  participants  often 
remained  engaged  with  the RCC for an  extended  period of time and over 35-percent  of study 
participants  had been  receiving  services  at the RCC for over one year  with  some  having 
remained  engaged  over multiple years. 257 Given  the chronic nature of SUD,  this extended  
engagement—which  is typically  not attainable in  treatment —is invaluable.  
Evidence of the  effectiveness  of recovery coaching  
is also emerging.  One  study found that  parents  with  
SUD who  were  involved in  the child  welfare system  
and who  were  randomly assigned  to receive 
recovery coaching  were  significantly  more  likely  to 
achieve and maintain  reunification  with  their  
children  than parents randomly assigned  to usual 
services.258 Other  studies  found that  recovery 
coaches  benefit those they  serve by improving 
relationships with  providers and social  supports,259 
increasing  treatment  utilization260 and retention,261 
and reducing relapse rates .262,263 Additionally, 
compared  to a control group receiving  treatment  as 
usual, pregnant and post-partum people receiving  
services  from a peer  counselor in  a treatment  
program were  found to more strongly recommend  
the program at which  they  received  services than  
members  of the  control group. They  described  their  
peer counselors as empathic,  identifying them  as the 
most  helpful aspect of their treatment. 264  
RCOs operate many, but  not all,  RCCs. RCOs  lead  or coordinate recovery-focused policy  
advocacy  activities  and recovery-focused community  education  and outreach  programs and often 
provide PRSS—typically  through one or more RCCs. Serving a broad recovery  community  that 
includes  not only  people in  or seeking recovery, but their  families,  friends and allies,  RCOs may  
be local  or statewide.  They  share an overarching mission: mobilizing  people and resources to  
increase the prevalence and quality  of long -term  recovery from alcohol and other  SUDs.265 
Ideally,  the peers who  staff  RCCs should have the knowledge and skills  needed to  help  
individuals find and follow pathways to  recovery that  may  differ from theirs. Connecticut 
Communities  for Addiction Recovery (CCAR) captured  this inclusive vision in  one oft-quoted 
statement:  “You  are in recovery if  you say  you are.”266,267 This  reminds peer  workers that  there 
are many  pathways  to recovery and that  their  role is not to  judge, exclude,  or promote a specific 
pathway, but rather to help  those they  serve  find and follow a pathway that  works for them.   
Research  on Collegiate  Recovery Programs (CRPs) is  limited,  but is growing as  well.  As of 
February 2022, the association  representing  CRPs had over 150 members  throughout the United  
States  and one member  in the United  Kingdom.268 A survey of 29 CRPs found that annual “The CCAR philosophy is  that ‘our tent  
is big enough for everyone.’ We  don’t 
really  pay attention  to what  your illness  
is, your drug of choice,  your recovery 
support, the medication  you may  be on 
(or not on), etc.  ‘You are in  recovery if 
you say  you are’  and you are welcome.  
Our thriving all -recovery groups 
support this  notion. As  a result,  we 
have become an incredibly  diverse 
organization.”  
—Phil  Valentine  
Source:  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-
960-4_14  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  63 abstinence rates  among participating  students 
ranged from 75- to  100-percent,  averaging  92-
percent.  Across these sites,  most  CRP members  had 
not used  substances  for several years, wh ile 5 
percent reported past  month  alcohol or other  drug 
use. This  is a much  lower  rate than  is found among 
age group peers in  the first  year  following 
treatment. 269,270 CRP members  also have been  
found to  have higher grade-point averages  than  the 
student population as  whole.271 For example,  
students participating  in the Texas  Tech  CRP  had a 
consistently  higher average GPA  from 2002 through 
2005 than  the student body as  a whole, averaging  
3.181 over that period compared  to the overall  
average of  2.926.272  
Additionally, research  suggests that  CRPs may  be an  effective marketing  tool for colleges  and 
universities.  For example,  34-percent  of CRP  participants  responding to  one survey indicated  
that they  would not have  been  in college were  it not for a CRP and 20-percent  reported  that they  
would not have enrolled  at their institution  if it had not  offered a CRP.273  
Racial and ethnic minority  students  appear to  be underrepresented in  CRPs.  The survey of 29 
CRPs cited  above found that 91-percent of participants  identified  as White.274 An earlier  study 
involving one of the 29 CRPs observed that 95% of CRP members  were  non-Hispanic Whites  
while 81% of the larger  student body were  non-Hispanic Whites.  The authors hypothesized  that 
the disproportionately low representation  of minorities  may  reflect  lower  rates  of access  to 
treatment  and to  four-year  universities  due to  historic inequities.275  
Nationally,  there are  over 40 
recovery high schools (RHS) 
in operation across 21 states  
as of May  2021.276 Most  RHS 
have licensed  counselors or 
other clinical staff  and require 
students to  participate in 
mutual  aid groups. Recovery 
high schools are small,  with  
enrollment ranging from six  
to 50 students.277 Some  RHS  
have dedicated  facilities  and 
others share space  as part of 
public high schools.278,279 One  
study found that RHS  students 
tend to reflect  the racial  and 
ethnic composition of the communities  in which  they  
are located  and have  more risk  factors for substance use  and relapse relative to youth completing  
treatment  locally  who  did not  enroll in  a recovery high school. These students also  had more risk  A survey of 29 CRPs found that 
annual abstinence rates  among CRP 
students ranged from 75 to 100-
percent and averaged  92-percent.  
Across these sites,  5-percent of 
students reported past  year  alcohol or 
other drug use,  a much  lower  rate than 
is found among youth in  the first year  
following treatment.  CRP members  
also have higher retention and 
graduation rates  and higher grades 
than the student population as whole.  
Finch,  AJ. Recovery  high schools  growth  chart:  1979 -2021.  Association  of 
Recovery  Schools.  2021. Retrieved at https://recoveryschools.org/rhs-growth-chart/  
Recovery High Schools Growth Chart: 1979 -2021  
Finch,  AJ. Recovery  high schools  growth  chart:  1979 -2021.  Association  of 
Recovery  Schools.  2021. Retrieved  at https://recoveryschools.org/rhs-growth-
chart/  
Recovery High Schools Growth Chart: 1979 -2021  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  64 factors  than  a national  sample of their  peers  exiting  treatment.  RHS  students  also had higher rates  
of mental  illness  than  members  of both the  local  and national  comparison  groups. Additionally, 
they tended  to have  greater  substance use  problem  severity  than  members  of the  two control  
groups. 280 Another study found that  RHS  students  were  more  likely  than  age-group controls  who  
had received  treatment  but were  not enrolled in  a RHS  to be abstinent  from  alcohol  and drugs  
and more  likely  to graduate  from  high school  than  members  of the  control  group. The  authors  
estimated  that increased  graduation rates  associated  with  RHS  attendance resulted  in mean  net 
savings  per student  from  $16,000 to $52,000, a  benefit -to-cost ratio  of 3.0 to  7.2.281 One  study 
noted that  young people  of color  often did not  have  access  to treatment  before  enrolling in  an 
RHS282 and another suggested the  RHS  model  could be  well  suited  to serving Hispanic  
communities  as the schools  can be customized  to meet  local  needs,  such  as reducing stigma,  
which  was cited  as an important  barrier to  help-seeking  among Hispanics.283 While small,  the 
number of RHSs has  been  climbing  slowly  over the  past 30 years  as shown in  the chart, 
above.284 
Like an  RHS,  an Alternative Peer  Group (APG)  combines  clinical  and peer  recovery  support. 
APGs  adopt  a family -centered  model,  offering a  supportive  community  of recovering  peers  and a  
broader positive social  environment.  They  combine  these with  counseling and case  management  
services.285 APGs  differ from  RHSs in  that they  are community - rather than  school -based. APGs  
are also small  in number but  growing. There  were  24 established  APGs  in 16 states  in 2019. At  
that time,  20 more  were  in development.286 APGs  can become key components  of integrated  
youth service networks, linking with  adolescent  SUD  treatment  programs, RHSs,  and other 
youth-serving organizations. While APGs  incorporate  many  practices  and elements  associated  
with positive  outcomes,  effectiveness  research  is currently  lacking.   
Recovery housing is  the most  widely  available form  of recovery  support  infrastructure  in the 
United  States.  In 2020, it  was estimated  that there may  be more  than  17,500 recovery  residences  
nationally.287 Research  on Oxford Houses —rented  homes  jointly  operated  by residents  who  
share  a lease and other  costs —found that  residents  who  stay for six  months  or more  are less 
likely  to return to substance  use than  those  who  remain  a shorter period of time.288 A study of 
recovery residences  found that  residents  achieved  significant  improvements  in alcohol  and drug 
use, employment,  psychiatric  symptoms, and criminal  justice system  involvement.289 Further, an  
experiment  in which  participants  with  OUD  were  randomly assigned  to usual  care,  abstinence-
contingent  recovery housing, or a  combination  of reinforcement -based  treatment  and recovery 
housing found that  abstinence -contingent  recovery housing was  associated  with  higher rates  of 
abstinence and that  the addition  of intensive  reinforcement -based  treatment  (RBT) further 
improved outcomes.290 A subsequent  study with  a similar  population yielded  similar  results.291  
Sustainable financing for PRSS is  indispensable.  While time- limited discretionary grants  have  
been  instrumental  in initiating,  expanding,  or enhancing peer  services  and RCOs, reliable long-
term revenue  streams  are essential  to developing a  sustainable RSS infrastructure. The 
Administration’s  call for an  expanded Substance Abuse  Prevention and Treatment  Block  Grant  
(Block Grant) with  a 10-percent  RSS set -aside,  included  in the President’s  budget, represents  an 
important  step in this direction. In addition, Medicaid —can play  a role in funding PRSS,  
including in the context  of accountable  care organizations, chronic  care models,  and alternative 
payment  mechanisms  focusing on outcomes  or values -based  purchasing, which  can offer flexible 
options  for covering the cost of this  service. Medicare may  also be able to play  a role in 
reimbursing PRSS.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  65 Virtually  all of our efforts  to address  substance  use and SUD —from  primary prevention and 
harm  reduction, to  law enforcement,  treatment,  and recovery  support —are  impeded,  to a greater  
or lesser  degree, by still  pervasive  stigma.  A phenomenon most  acutely  experienced  by people  
with SUD  and those  in recovery, stigma  is a cross -cutting  concern that  requires  significant  
coordinated efforts  to address. The  stigma  associated  with  substance  use manifests  in many  ways 
and intersects  with  a range  of factors,  including race,  gender, and socio -economic  status.  Social  
stigma is  embodied in negative  attitudes  and beliefs  about  substance  use and people  with SUD  
and can  be reflected  in discriminatory policies  and practices  based  on or influenced  by those  
negative attitudes  and beliefs.  When  embodied  in policies  and practices  that limit  the 
opportunities, access  to resources, and wellbeing  of stigmatized  groups, social  stigma is  
sometimes  referred to  as structural  stigma.292 Finally,  people  with  SUD  apply the  negative  
attitudes  and beliefs  reflected  in social  stigma to  themselves,  resulting  in a phenomenon known 
as self-stigma.  As this occurs  individuals  may blame themselves  for having SUD  and/or may  
believe that  their  SUD  is the result  of inherent  moral  weakness  on their  part.  This  leads  to shame 
and fear  of social  exclusion  or other  negative results  if their condition is  exposed. This can result  
in individuals  avoiding treatment  or other  services.293,294,295 The Administration’s  planned 
activities  to address  stigma are  discussed  throughout  this chapter.  
As part of its  effort  to build  back  better  following the  COVID-19 pandemic,  the Administration  
will work to  increase our scientific understanding of recovery, foster adoption of more  consistent  
certification  and accreditation  standards  for peer  workers  and the  organizations  that employ them  
nationally,  expand the  PRSS workforce  and the organizational  infrastructure  that supports  it, 
address  stigma and misunderstanding, and  eliminate barriers  to safe and supportive  housing, 
employment,  and education  for people  in recovery. In all of these efforts, the  Administration  will 
continue  to solicit  input  from  and build  partnerships  with  the recovery  community  and others  
directly  impacted  by substance  use, keeping in  mind  the recovery community  dictum,  “Nothing 
about  us without  us.”  
Principle 1: Expand the Science of Recovery.  
(Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP, OJP; ED/IES; HHS/ASPE, AHRQ, CDC, CMS, HRSA, NIH, 
SAMHSA; HUD/OPDR; ONDCP; VA/VHA; DOD)  
Given  the need  to continually  expand our scientific understanding of the recovery process,  RSS,  
and the  many  factors  that mediate outcomes,  further targeted,  actionable research  is needed  to 
guide  policy and resource  allocation  decisions  in the recovery domain. To prioritize  and stage 
such translational  research,  ONDCP  will partner with  the National Institute on Drug  Abuse  
(NIDA),  and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism , the National  Institute on 
Justice (NIJ), the  National  Institute  on Corrections  (NIC), and the  Department  of Health  and 
Human  Services  (HHS)  Assistant  Secretary  on Planning and Evaluation  (ASPE)  to convene  a 
cross -agency  workgroup to  develop, prioritize,  and co ordinate  the implementation  of a federal  
recovery agenda. The findings  and recommendations  of this  group will  be transmitted  to the drug 
data interagency  workgroup, described  in the Data Systems and Research chapter.  In addition, 
they will be used  to identify  federal  recovery research  priorities  and suggest  specific  existing  or 
proposed funding streams  that could support  studies  on prioritized topics. 
A. Establish a federal recovery research agenda to support the development of science-based policy in relation to recovery. (Agencies Involved: DOD/CDMRP; 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  66 DOL/ETA/DRE; DOJ/NIC, OJP; ED/IES; HHA/AHRQ, ASPE, CMS, CDC, NIH, 
SAMHSA; HUD/OPDR; OMB; ONDCP; VA/VHA)  
In partnership with  key federal  research  agencies , ONDCP should convene the  research  
and evaluation  components  of other drug control  agencies  to: (1) summarize the  current  
scientific knowledge  of the  recovery process  and RSS;  (2) catalogue current  federally -
funded research  and evaluation  efforts  germane to  these topics,  and;  (3) identify  key areas  
where  additional  research  is needed  to inform  policy  and resource  allocation  decisions.  
This interagency  team  should assess the  extent  to which  current  federal  research  and 
program  evaluation  portfolios  address  identified  priorities  and will  recommend rese arch 
to inform  policy development  and resource  allocation  decisions. To  prepare  for an  initial  
convening of the  Recovery Research  Workgroup, ONDCP  and NIDA should jointly  
coordinate  the efforts  of participating  agencies  as they:  (1) catalogue  current  and recent  
federally -funded research  with  a SUD  recovery nexus, and;  (2) identify, list,  and 
prioritize  areas  of research  that will support  the development  of evidence-based  policy  
and programs  in the recovery domain. Subsequently, ONDCP  and NIDA should:  (1) 
summarize the  findings  of the  group and provide  specific recommendations  regarding the  
prioritization  and funding of relevant  research  and evaluation  efforts  by agency ; and , (2) 
obtain  interagency  clearance of a  document  summarizing  these recommendations  and 
secure  the commitment  of agency  leaders  to implement  the recommendations  as feasible,  
given resource  availability  and broader research  priorities.   
B. Establish targets and monitor progress.  
Following approval  of the research priorities  by Administration  leadership, NIDA and  
ONDCP  should coordinate  a process  through which  participating  agencies  would 
identify:  (1) prioritized research  they  would undertake  with  existing  resources, and;  (2) 
additional  research  they would undertake  subject  to the availability  of resources. 
ONDCP , in partnership with participating agencies, should monitor progress  toward 
meeting  recovery research  commitments  and share  progress  through the  interagency  
workgroup.  
C. Incorporate identified  recovery research needs in the President’s budget.  
To ensure  that agencies  have  the resources  needed  to support  priority recovery  research,  
ONDCP,  in consultation  with  NIDA and other participating  agencies,  will continue to 
recommend  relevant  research  funding priorities  and funding levels  annually  for the 
President’s  Budget  through the Drug Control  Budget.  
Principle 2: Make  Recovery Possible for More  Americans 
People  with  SUD  follow  many  pathways  to recovery or remission  and interact  with  diverse  
sectors,  including  law enforcement  and other first  responders, the  criminal  justice and  child  
welfare systems,  primary care,  hospitals, harm  reduction programs, housing and homeless  
services,  and SUD  treatment.  It is critical  not only that  we understand the many  trajectories  to 
recovery, but  that we adopt  flexible,  responsive  approaches  for helping  people  with  SUD  
navigate  the many  challenges  they  encounter  and both find  and follow  a pathway to  recovery or 
remission  that works  for them.  Our nation’s  emerging  PRSS infrastructure, supported by a  
growing number of peer -led organizations, is  essential  to developing and implementing  such  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  67 strategies.  Therefore, sustainable financing  for PRSS and for the  organizations  through which  
they are offered is critically  important.  Consistent  standards  are also needed  to ensure  quality  and 
safety,  to facilitate reimbursement  from  payers  operating in multiple jurisdictions, and to permit  
reciprocity  of credentials  for peer  recovery specialists.   
Training  and technical  assistance,  including  through SAMHSA’s  National  Peer -Run Training  
and Technical  Assistance Center  for Addiction Recovery Peer  Support, are  also indispensable  to 
efforts  to develop capacity  and help  states,  organizations , and peer  recovery support  workers  
adopt  more  consistent  standards  nationally.  Accessible and affordable  training  for individuals  
seeking  to become  peer  specialists  is essential  to developing the  peer  workforce. More  consistent  
standards  for peer  workers  and for organizations  through which  PRSS are  offered will  also 
improve  quality, create opportunities  for reciprocity  of credentials  from  one jurisdiction  to 
another, and facilitate funding from  public  and private  insurers  with  national  or multi -state 
regional  coverage  areas.  
When  provided by an institution  of higher  education, training to  become a  peer  specialist  can be 
reimbursed under the Health  Resources  and Services  Administration  (HRSA)  Substance  Use 
Disorder Treatment  and Recovery Loan  Repayment  Program. While this  is a valuable resource  
that should be  expanded, training provided by an  institution  of higher education may  not be 
accessible or culturally  appropriate  to all those  seeking  to become  a peer  support  worker. For  
many prospective  peer  workers, educational  loans  may  be inaccessible,  and, to  them,  higher 
education  settings  may  seem  far removed  from  the world in  which  they  will operate  and the  
experience they will bring to  bear  in their work. A  broader array of training  and technical  
assistance will  be needed to develop the  peer  workforce.  
A. Expand PRSS capacity and foster the adoption of more consistent standards for the 
peer workforce, RCCs, RCOs, and similar peer- led organizations.  (Agencies 
Involved: HHS/CMS, HRSA, IHS, SAMHSA; Labor/ETA, ODEP; VA/VHA)  
SAMHSA,  with  support  from  ONDCP,  CMS,  and HRSA,  should convene  key federal  
partners  and external  stakeholders  with  a role in developing peer  workforce  and RCO/  
RCC capacity  and applicable credentialing  and accreditation  standards. Examples  of 
external  stakeholders  germane to this effort  include:  the International  Society  of 
Substance  Use Professionals  (ISSUP);  the International  Certification  and Reciprocity 
Consortium  (IC&RC);  the Association  for Addiction  Professionals  (NAADAC)  and its  
certification  arm, the National  Certification  Commission  for Addiction Professionals  
(NCC-AP);  the Association  of Recovery Community Organizations  (ARCO);  the Council  
on Accreditation  of Peer  Recovery Support  Services  (CAPRSS);  the Global  Centre  for 
Credentialing  and Certification  (GCCC);  and, the  National  Association  of Alcohol  and 
Drug Abuse  Directors  (NASADAD)   
Through this  process, SAMHSA  should develop recommendations  for: (1) expanding the  
capacity  of the  existing  workforce  and peer  organizational  infrastructure  through training, 
technical  assistance,  and related  efforts;  and, (2) promoting the  adoption of more  
consistent  credentialing  and accreditation  standards  and improving quality  across  states  
nationally,  taking into  consideration  existing  national  peer  certification  and recovery  
support  service provider organization  accreditation  standards. Recommendations  could  
include  support  to states,  RCCs, RCOs, and other entities  through existing  federall y-
funded training  and technical  assistance providers, such  as the Addiction Technology 
Transfer Network, the  technical  assistance  contracts  for various  federal  discretionary  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  68 grant  programs, and the National  Peer -Run  Training  and Technical  Assistance  Center for 
Addiction  Recovery Peer  Support.  
Upon approval  of the  plan,  SAMHSA  should spearhead  efforts  to implement  
recommendations, reporting periodically  on progress. Capacity -building through training, 
technical  assistance,  and adoption of more  consistent  credentials  and standards  for peer  
workers, recovery community  centers,  and other entities  providing PRSS could allow  for 
expanded public  and private  insurance  coverage,  improved quality  overall, and permit  
greater  reciprocity  of credentials  across  state lines  to support  increased  workforce  
mobility  in response  to evolving needs.   
B. Foster the adoption of more consistent recovery housing standards. (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ/CRD, OJP; HHS/ASPE, HRSA, SAMHSA; HUD; ONDCP; USDA/RD)  
More  consistent  recovery housing standards  across  states  would help  prevent  exploitation  
of residents  and funders  by unscrupulous  operators, better  ensure  quality  across  states,  
and help  consumers, addiction  professionals, and payers  identify  quality  recovery 
residences.  
SAMHSA  and the  Department  for Housing and Urban Development  (HUD)  should co -
lead efforts  to promote  adoption of nationally  recognized recovery residence standards, 
engaging stakeholders  such  as National  Alliance for Re covery Residences  (NARR), 
Oxford House, NASADAD,  the National  Conference  of State Legislatures  (NCSL), the  
National  Governors’ Association  (NGA),  the National  Association  of Counties  (NACO),  
and the  ONDCP  Model  State Drug Law  contractor, Legislative Analysis  and Public  
Policy  Association  (LAPPA),  which  convened a  consultative  process  through which  a 
Model  State Recovery Residence Certification  Act was developed in  2021. 296 Standards  
should ensure  that people  following all recovery pathways, including those  receiving  
medications  for opioid use  disorder (MOUD),  have  access  to quality  recovery housing. 
Recovery housing does  not replace Housing First  resources  which  provide  low-/no-
barrier housing coupled  with  wrap  around services.  Idea lly, recovery housing should  be 
linked  to Housing First  resources, complementing  them  and permitting  a bi-directional  
flow of residents  between  the two settings  based  on resident  need  and desires  and the fit 
of residents  within  the respective housing contexts.  Outside  of federally -subsidized 
housing settings,  the standards  that govern  recovery housing are  set at the state level.  
Moreover, local  zoning laws  and building codes  can facilitate,  hinder, or prevent  the 
establishment  of recovery housing and may  even  represent  violations  of applicable 
federal  civil rights  laws  such  as the Americans  with  Disabilities  Act,  the Rehabilitation  
Act, and the  Fair Housing Act.  SAMHSA  and HUD should work to  support  state and  
local  governments  and standards  organizations  in developing and implementing  recovery 
housing standards  that will ensure  access  to recovery housing to  protect  the rights  of 
individuals  in or seeking  recovery  from  SUD.  Additionally,  SAMHSA  and HUD should 
develop recommendations  for policy, training  and technical  assistance.  These 
recommendations  should include guidance  related  to recovery housing through the  HUD 
Continuum  of Care  and in  the context  of other  federally -subsidized  housing programs. 
Additionally, SAMHSA  and HUD may  elect  to publish a  guidance  document  developed  
in collaboration with  these stakeholders.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  69 C. Expand and sustain funding for recovery support services and recovery housing.  
(Agencies Involved: AmeriCorps, HHS/CMS, HRSA, IHS, SAMHSA; HUD/CPD, OCPD; 
ONDCP; USDA/RD; VA/VHA)  
As discussed  in the introduction to  this chapter,  multiple strategies  will be needed  to 
flexibly  and sustainably  finance PRSS.  No single  approach will  work i n every state,  
locality,  or service  system.  SAMHSA  and CMS,  with  support  from  VA,  HRSA,  IHS,  and 
AmeriCorps, should review  current  federal,  state,  and local  financing mechanisms  for 
PRSS,  and develop recommendations  for these  services.  Additionally, they  should work 
with states,  tribes,  local  governments, and peer organizations  to highlight  and promote  
the adoption of effective PRSS financing solutions. As  part of this  process, CMS should 
update  the guidance  provided under State Medicaid  Director  Letter  number 07-011, 
which  provided guidance  to states  interested  in coverage  of PRSS under Medicaid.  
Additionally, it  should explore  the feasibility  of supporting innovation in the 
reimbursement  and utilization  of PRSS under Medicaid.  
A clearer  definition  of PRSS under Medicaid,  information on promising reimbursement  
models  under the  program, and updated guidance  to states  on the  supervision and 
reimbursement  of PRSS could facilitate more  consistency  in approaches  and could help  
support  the use of Medicaid  to reimburse  PRSS.  Additionally,  with  support  from  
ONDCP,  HRSA,  IHS,  the Department  of Agriculture  (USDA)/  Office  of Rural  
Development  (RD), AmeriCorps, and SAMHSA,  and CMS  should identify  potential  
mechanisms  for financing  for PRSS and for peer -led organizations.  
a) Financing for PRSS and Peer-led Organizations  (HHS/CMS, HRSA, IHS, 
SAMHSA; HUD/CPD, OCPD; ONDCP; USDA/RD; VA/VHA)  
CMS and SAMHSA,  with support  from  IHS,  HRSA,  and other federal  
agencies,  should work with  states,  Tribes,  local  governments, and peer  
organizations  to identify,  highlight,  and promote  the adoption of effective 
financing solutions. As  part of this  process, CMS,  with  support  from  these 
agencies,  should develop and disseminate guidance  to state Medicaid  
programs, including  in relation  to organizational  homes  for peer  recovery 
support  specialists,  their  supervision, various  models  for sustainably  funding 
this service under state plans. In addition, in partnership with  SAMHSA,  CMS 
should offer technical  assistance to  states  seeking  to initiate,  expand, or 
change  mechanisms  for covering PRSS under Medicaid.  SAMHSA,  with 
support  from  CMS,  HRSA,  IHS,  and other agencies,  should provide  guidance  
to states  on a  broader range  of financing  mechanisms,  including  the Block  
Grant  and state and local  funding, as  well  as mechanisms  for braiding these 
funding streams  with  Medicaid.  With  support  from  ONDCP,  HRSA,  IHS,  and 
USDA/RD,  AmeriCorps, SAMHSA  and CMS should identify  and provide  
recommendations  on potential  mechanisms  for financing for PRSS,  including 
through peer -led organizations.  
b) Financing for Recovery Housing.  (HHS/ASPE, CMS, HRSA, IHS, SAMHSA; 
HUD/CPD, OCPD; ONDCP; USDA/RD; VA/VHA)  
Sustainable financing streams  for recovery  housing are  also needed. Financing  
approaches  will need  to align  with  and complement  self-pay funding models  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  70 under which  residents  seek  and obtain  employment  and pay for their  room  and 
board, but  may  also need  to accommodate  models  that serve  individuals  with  
greater  levels  of impairment  who  may  require  support  for a  longer period of 
time.  Transitional  payment  approaches  can cover the  cost of recovery housing 
during an  initial  pre-employment  period. Such  approaches  may  need  to have  
flexible  provisions  to account  for limitations  in employment  opportunities  in 
certain  communities  or the  need  for extended  support  among individuals  with  
high levels  of problem  severity  and complexity  and low recovery capital.  For 
more  impaired individuals,  the period of time during which  such  
reimbursement  is allowable may  need  to be extended.   
The HUD Continuum  of Care  program  represents  another potential  source  of 
funding for recovery housing, provided regulatory and policy  barriers  to 
permanent  housing associated  with  stays in recovery residences, which are 
typically classified as a form of transitional housing, can be resolved. Finally, 
the HUD Recovery Housing pilot program, authorized under the SUPPORT Act, helps those in recovery from SUD achieve stable housing through grants to states and the District of Columbia that provide assistance for individuals’ recovery housing for up to two years.  
HUD and HHS (both SAMHSA and  CMS)  should identify  legal,  regulatory, 
and policy  barriers  to increasing  access  to recovery housing and tenancy  
supports. They  should consult  with  key stakeholders, including  recovery  
housing associations,  NASADAD,  and the  National  Association  of Medicaid  
Directors  (NAMD).  
c) Financing of Recovery Support Services for A dolescents and Young 
Adults  
Services  for adolescents  and young adults  in or seeking  recovery are 
especially  limited  and require  development  as well  as sustainable financing  
mechanisms.  These include recovery high schools, alternative peer  groups, 
and collegiate recovery programs. SAMHSA,  the Department  of Education  
(ED), and the  Administration  for Children  and Families  (ACF) should jointly  
develop and implement  a plan  for seeding  the development  of these critical  
services,  including through grant  funding and technical  assistance,  and should 
work with  school  districts,  colleges  and universities,  and other stakeholders  to 
develop and implement  plans  for sustaining  these critical RSS. In developing 
this plan, they should consult with key stakeholders, including the Association of Recovery in Higher Education, the Association of Recovery Schools, and the Association of Alternative Peer Groups.  
Competitive grants may offer an effective mechanism for seeding and developing these entities with a goal of s ecuring sustainable funding from 
school districts, higher education institutions,  state and local  governments. 
Additionally, it  may be possible  to identify  ongoing funding streams  within  
current  ED programs.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  71 Principle 3: Eliminate  Barriers and Increase  Opportunities 
Developing and implementing  evidence-based  policies  and programs  to increase the number of 
Americans  who  can achieve and sustain  recovery is  essential  to building a recovery-ready  nation. 
However, in  the absence of effective educatio nal and stigma reduction efforts, policies  and 
programs  will not be not enough. As  NIDA Director  Nora  Volkow  has noted, “as a society,  we 
still keep  addiction  in the shadows, regarding it  as something shameful, reflecting  lack of 
character,  weakness  of will,  or even  conscious  wrongdoing, not  a medical  issue.”297 
 Additionally, we  must  redouble  our efforts  to eliminate the  myriad  social,  cultural,  linguistic,  
legal,  and regulatory barriers  people  in recovery confront  as they  attempt  to rejoin  and contribute  
to their  communities,  remembering  that people  with  illicit  drug use  disorders  confront  the dual  
stigma of being both a  “drug user”  and as  someone  engaged  in criminal  activity  by virtue  of the  
fact that their  SUD  involves  substances  that are illegal  to possess,  purchase, or sell.  To be 
effective in these undertakings, we  must  change  how  we think and talk about  substance  use and 
recovery, replacing  the inconsistent,  and often  misleading  and stigmatizing  terminology we  
continue  to use with  neutral,  science-based  terminology.  
A. Ensure the adoption of consistent, neutral, science -based language regarding 
substance use and related topics across the federal supply and demand control 
functions.  (Agencies Involved : DOD, DOL/ETA, ODEP; DOJ/DEA, OJP; DOS; 
HHS/CDC, CMS, FDA, HRSA, IHS, NIH, OASH, SAMHSA; ONDCP; VA/VHA).  
Research  has shown that  the terminology we use can affect  our perceptions  of people  
with or in  recovery from  SUD  and our judgements  about  them.  One  notable  study, 
touched upon briefly in  the Substance Use Disorder Treatment  chapter,  demonstrated that  
even  highly- trained  mental  health  and substance use  clinicians  are susceptible to this 
influence. When  randomly assigned  to groups  responding to  case vignettes  that were  
identical  with  the exception  that one referred to  the subject  as a “person with  a substance  
use disorder”  while the other  referred to  him as a “substance  abuser,”  those  exposed to 
the second version were  more  likely  to assign  blame to  the subject  and to agree  that 
punishment  was appropriate.298 
Similar  studies  conducted with  other  groups  further demonstrate  the power of language  to 
subconsciously influence perceptions  and judgments  about  people  with  SUD  and those  in 
or seeking  recovery.299,300,301,302 Among health  professionals, negative  attitudes  toward 
people  with  SUD  is widespread  and is associated  with  routinized care,  reduced  empathy,  
and poor outcomes .303 Internalized  stigma is associated  with  reduced  willingness  to seek  
help for a  behavioral  health  condition,304 while social  stigma (negative  attitudes  and 
beliefs  about  people  with  SUD)  is associated  with increased  support  for punitive polices,  
and reduced support  for public  health  policies,  such  as expanding access  to treatment.305 
An analysis  of language  used  in U.S.  news  media found stigmatizing  language  and 
framing were  not only highly prevalent,  but had increased  substantially  from  2008 to 
2018. The  authors  argued that  development  of non-stigmatizing  language  standards  for 
journalism  was a public  health  priority.306 While experts  agree that  the opioid overdose  
epidemic is  first and foremost  a public  health  challenge,  research  has found that  the issue  
is most  often framed in  news  media a s a public  safety  issue.  Accordingly, law  
enforcement  solutions  related  to the arrest  and prosecution of individuals  responsible  for 
supplying illicit  opioids  were  predominantly  mentioned  in the media.307 Even  within  the 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  72 federal  government, inconsistency  in terminology and stigmatizing  terms  remain  a 
pervasive  problem. The federal  government  should therefore  work across  the public  
health  and public  safety  sectors  to ensure  use of consistent,  neutral,  and science-based  
language  and person-first  framings.  
Building on the  January 9, 2017 memorandum  from  the ONDCP  Director  to the heads  of 
departments  and agencies  entitled  Changing Federal  Terminology  Regarding Substance  
Use and Substance  Use Disorder,  ONDCP,  NIDA,  SAMHSA,  NIAAA,  and the  
Department  of Justice  (DOJ)/  Office  of Justice Programs  (OJP)  should co -convene  a 
workgroup that  will develop  and publicly release a plan  for adopting consistent,  neutral,  
science-based  language  regarding substance use  and SUD  across  the federal  government. 
The plan  should identify actions  that will be undertaken immediately,  such  as 
development  and adoption of  a guide  to support  uniform  terminology and framing  in 
relation  to substance  use among Executive  Branch agencies,  and an  audit  of websites  and 
frequently updated documents. It  should also  include  actions  the Executive Branch can  
take independently  but that cannot  be completed  immediately,  and actions  that are 
beyond the  purview  of the  Executive Branch  and would require  Congressional  input  such 
as changes  in the terminology, definitions,  and framing regarding substance  use and SUD  
in statute (e.g., in  the Controlled Substance  Act and federal  housing law)  or changes  to 
the names  of agencies  that currently  include stigmatizing  and potentially  misleading  
terms,  such  as substance,  drug, or  alcohol  "abuse". The workgroup should publicly 
release brief  annual  updates  on progress  toward  accomplishing  the objectives  and broader 
goals  outlined  in the plan. This guidance  should be  shared with  professional  journals, 
media outlets,  and other key  communicators  so as to provide  best practices  in use of 
substance  use related  terms.   
B. Expand, enhance, and improve the coordination of federal anti -stigma efforts 
related to SU/SUD.  (Agencies Involved: DOD; DOL/ETA, ODEP; HHS/CMS, CDC, 
HRSA, IHS, NIH, OASH, SAMHSA; VA/VHA) 
The adoption of neutral,  science -based  terminology in  relation  to substance use  and SUD  
is a critical  and necessary  first step.  However, it  alone  will not adequately  address  
widespread  social  stigma and its devastating  impact.  Effective  stigma reduction  
campaigns  targeting  the general  public,  health  professionals, law  enforcement  and other  
first responders, and policymakers  must  be developed  and strategically  deployed in  
partnership with  state and local  governments  and the  private sector.  
CDC, with  support  from  SAMHSA,  NIH,  and ONDCP  should catalogue existing  federal  
stigma reduction  campaigns  with  a substance  use nexus, summarize the  scientific 
literature on stigma reduction in  relation  to substance  use and SUD,  identify  key lessons 
that can be learned  from  the mental  health,  HIV/AIDS,  and other stigma reduction  
literature,  and develop  recommendations  for a  coordinated federal  stigma reduction 
strategy.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  73 C. Expand employment opportunities and promote Recovery-Ready Workplace 
policies.  (Agencies Involved: Commerce; DOL/ETA, ODEP; EEOC; HHS/ASPE,  CDC, 
SAMHSA; OPM; VA/VHA)  
Employment is  a critically  important part  of the 
recovery journey for many  and is  also recognized as  a 
key form of recovery capital.308 Indeed, employment 
not only offers stabilizing  supports to  the individual and 
the larger  community,  but also reduces recidivism 
among people involved in  the criminal  justice system  
thereby enhancing public safety.  However,  a history of 
substance use  or related  criminal  justice system  
involvement constitutes  a significant barrier to  
meaningful employment  for the individual. A crucial 
form of recovery capital, employment is associated with enhanced rehabilitative outcomes for the individual and public safety outcomes for the greater community . 
ONDCP  should contribute to and coordinate with the 
Administration's existing interagency  process to  expand employment  opportunities for 
formerly incarcerated persons so that it may share its expertise on how to support individuals in recovery. ONDCP should also continue to co-lead a working group focused on recovery-ready workplace policies,  such  as those detailed  through 
CDC /National Institute for Occupational Safety  and Health’s  (NIOSH)  Workplace 
Supported Recovery initiative and New Hampshire’s Recovery-Friendly  Workplace 
initiative, which  was launched  with  funding from the Department of Labor and has been  
adopted by a number of states.  Participants  in that working group include SAMHSA,  the 
Departments  of Commerce,  the Department of Labor, NIOSH,  and the VA.  This  existing 
interagency  process works to develop and implement plans for establishing, expanding, 
and enhancing employment-related  initiatives  for people in  recovery  and people with  
active SUD,  including through broader adoption of approaches such  as the Individual 
Placement  and Support (IPS)  supported employment  model. In addition, with  support 
from the Office of Personnel Management  (OPM),  the Equal Opportunity Commission  
(EEOC), the Department of Commerce, the  Chief Human  Capital  Officers Council 
(CHCOC), and selected  other  agencies, it will explore opportunities to promote the 
adoption of recovery-ready  workplace 
 policies  within  the federal government. ONDCP 
should also apply these insights to the Administration's interagency process on expanding employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated persons.  
Recognizing that  
 the majority  of Americans  with  SUD are employed,309 it is essential  that 
more employers  adopt recovery-ready workplace policies  to prevent substance use  in the 
workforce, encourage help  seeking  by employees  with  SUD,  provide needed  
accommodations  and workplace supports for those in  treatment  and recovery, and build  
recovery-supportive workplace cultures —all of which  enhance public health  and public 
safety.  
D. Reduce legal, regulatory, policy, and practice barriers to recovery. (Agencies Involved: DOL/ETA, ODEP; DOJ/DEA, OJP; HHS/ASPE, CMS, IHS, OASH, SAMHSA; HUD; VA/VHA)  To improve outcomes  over the  
long-term,  we must  recommit  
to shifting the  focus of drug 
policy  from punishment and 
social  exclusion  to healing  and 
community  reintegration.  That 
is how we  will begin to  turn 
the tide,  building recovery-
ready communities  that can 
effectively  respond to  and heal 
from drug use,  addiction, and 
overdose. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  74 In today’s interconnected  world, even  criminal  charges that  are dropped and convictions 
that are  vacated  can leave an  indelible electronic record. Beyond that,  drug-related  
criminal  convictions can  carry unique, often lifelong penalties  that go above and beyond 
one’s sentence.  Known  as collateral consequences of conviction, these add-on restrictions  
or penalties  are common in  both state and federal law. Examples  include bans on access  
to public housing or public assistance,  ineligibility  to vote  or to  serve  on a jury, 
temporary or permanent ineligibility  for federal student aid,  ineligibility  for employment  
in health  care facilities  or within  a state government, or ineligibility  to obtain a 
professional license— even  in a field  in which  one had long practiced  as a licensed  
professional. Additionally,  a wide  range of  barriers associated  with  rules, policies,  
practices,  and attitudes  that do not meet  the definition of collateral consequences  of 
conviction can  create substantial barriers to  rejoining and fully contributing to  the 
community.5  
As noted in  the Criminal Justice and Public Safety  chapter,  collateral  consequences may serve a 
necessary  public safety  function when  there is  a nexus between  the restriction  and a harm to  be 
prevented, such  as barring convicted  sex offenders from employment where they may  have 
unsupervised interactions  with  children  or other vulnerable individuals.  However, as  the United  
States  Commission on Civil Rights has noted, when  they  do not  serve a necessary  public safety  
function and are not  narrowly tailored,  they  undermine public safety  by preventing successful  
community  reintegration.310 Specific actions  to address collateral  consequences of conviction  are 
described  in the criminal  justice chapter.  
SAMHSA,  HUD,  OJP,  ED, DOL,  and ONDCP  will co -lead  an interagency  workgroup that 
would identify  legal,  regulatory, and policy barriers to  treatment,  housing, employment,  health  
care,  education,  and public accommodations  and develop and implement  and action  plans to  
address them.  The workgroup would report annually to  interagency  partners on progress toward 
the objectives  identified  in its plan  and shall  develop  recommendations, including, potential  
statutory  changes.   
 
5  For example,  42 U.S. Code § 13661, Screening  of applicants for federally  assisted  housing,  makes  individuals 
determined  to have manufactured,  sold,  distributed,  used or possessed  a controlled substance ineligible  for public 
housing for a period of three  years  and prohibits admission  of households to federally  assisted  housing or federally  
assisted  housing programs if the housing agency  or property owner has reasonable cause to believe that any 
member  of the household’s “illegal  use (or pattern  of illegal use) of a controlled substance,  or abuse (or pattern  of 
abuse)  of alcohol, may interfere with the health,  safety,  or right to peaceful  enjoyment of the premises  by other 
residents.”  The statute  does not require conviction in a court of law for such perceived  offenses.  See 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2015- title42/pdf/USCODE -2015- title42 -chap135-subchapV-
sec13661.pdf .  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  75   
 

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  76 Reduce the  Supply  of Illicit  Substances  
through  Domestic  Collaboration  
Law enforcement  agencies  at all levels —federal,  state,  local,  Tribal , and territorial —work to  
combat  domestic cultivated and synthetic  drug production and trafficking  with  the goal  of 
protecting Americans  from  a lethal  drug supply contributing to  record levels  of fatal  drug 
overdoses. However, traffickers  continue  to refine  their  methods  and adopt  new  techniques  
distributing drugs  throughout  our communities.  Responding effectively  to the illicit  production, 
trafficking, and distribution  methods  of domestic criminal  organizations and Transnational  
Criminal  Organizations  (TCOs) is  a significant  challenge and remains  a Biden -Harris  
Administration  priority.  
Substantial  improvement  in collaboration  and cooperation between  agencies  at the federal  level  
and among federal,  state,  local,  Tribal , and territorial  agencies  is necessary  in order to effectively  
confront  the present  domestic illicit  drug trafficking landscape.  The near  continual  year -on-year  
rise in American  overdose  deaths  between  1999311 and 2021312 culminated  in the unprecedented 
and somber milestone in April  2021 when  the 12-month provisional  overdose  deaths  exceeded  
100,000313 for the  first time in  our history. This  is the clearest  indicator  yet that,  while  individual  
agency  efforts  to confront  the TCOs  responsible  for bringing drugs  into our communities  may  be 
laudable,  collectively,  the U.S.  Government  (USG)  is dedicated to stem ming the  flow  of illicit  
drugs  or to  impose  costs  sufficient  to deter  TCOs  from  trafficking  illicit  drugs  into the United  
States  and distributing  them  into our communities  and could do more . 
Additionally, considerable additional  domestic effort  is needed to  improve  our data collection  
and policy  and program  assessments  so we are clear  on what  efforts  are working, and which  need  
to be improved or replaced  with  alternatives.  
Four principal  lines  of effort are  necessary  to improve  domestic collaboration,  reduce  the supply 
of illicit  substances,  and decrease  the harms  caused  by these substances  in the United  States  and 
abroad:  
• Improve  information sharing and cooperation across  all levels  of government  to 
strengthen the  domestic response  to drug trafficking;  
• Deny  and disrupt  domestic production, trafficking, and distribution of illicit  substances;  
• Improve  assessments  of supply reduction  initiative effectiveness  and efficiency  and 
allocate resources  accordingly;  and 
• Protect  individuals  and the  environment  at home  from  criminal  exploitation  by those  
associated  with  drug production and trafficking.  
These domestic lines  of effort  are complemented  by the activities  outlined  in the Southwest,  
Northern, and Caribbean  Border Counternarcotics  Strategies,  and by the National  Interdiction 
Command and Control  Plan,  which  collectively  serve  as companions  to the National Drug 
Control Strategy . The three border strategies  provide  strategy  guidance  linking international  
supply reduction efforts  with  domestic  efforts.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  77 Principle 1: Improve information sharing and cooperation 
across all levels of government to strengthen the domestic 
response to drug trafficking.  
Law enforcement  capacity  cannot  be static in  a dynamic  drug threat  environment.  Improving 
information- and intelligence-sharing across  the federal  government  and with  state,  territorial,  
local,  and Tribal partners  to target  drug traffickers  and their  networks  is essential  to addressing 
the public  health  threat  posed by TCOs.  Successful  seizures,  or interdictions, of illicit  drugs, 
illicit  proceeds, and weapons, and the  dismant ling of TCOs  require  building the tools,  
relationships, and capacity  to address  a constantly  evolving set  of criminal  networks  that adapt  
their methods, change  their  tactics  and techniques, and employ  new  technologies  to avoid 
detection,  interdiction,  arrest,  and prosecution.  
A. Leverage information -sharing structures to deepen a collective understanding of the 
drug trafficking and distribution environments and enhance investigations.  
(Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE, USCG; DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI , OCDETF; IC; 
Treasury/FINCEN, IRS, TFFC; DOD; USPIS) 
Agencies’  structural  and cultural  impediments  to sharing information hinder public  safety  
and public  health  entities’  ability  to fully understand and respond to  drug trafficking  
threats  and substance use  in our communities.  Mitigating  these impediments  requires  a 
fresh, open, and collaborative agency -agnostic approach. Public  safety, public  health,  and 
regulatory agencies,  the U.S.  Intelligence Community (IC), and the  national  security  
community  will coordinate  development  of policies  and systems  that provide  the strategic 
drug intelligence elements  necessary  access  to domestic public  safety  and aggregate  
public  health  information and appropriate  national  security  information in  a way  that 
preserves  the individual  privacies  and civil  liberties  of American  citizens.   
Robust  strategic drug intelligence,  synthesized  by elements  charged, resourced, and 
governed to  provide  federal,  state,  local,  Tribal , territorial,  and private/public  sector  
agencies  with  meaningful  information to shape  proactive,  coordinated, whole -of-
government  counternarcotics  and counter- TCO  planning and resourcing is  a priority.  
Drug trafficking organizations  exploit  information  gaps  and seams  among agencies  and 
jurisdictions. For  example,  along the Southwest  border, many  agencies —including those  
at the federal  level —are currently  unable  to share  data captured  by automated  license 
plate readers  that could provide  information on drug traffickers  moving into the United  
States,  impeding  our collective ability  to conduct  the intelligence-driven interdictions  of 
illicit  drugs. Additionally, perceived  and actual  obstacles  to information sharing between  
the intelligence and law enforcement  communities  result  in gaps  exploitable  by TCOs  
and inhibit  the ability  to develop  and synthesize  strategic intelligence on the  global  drug 
threat.   
Consistent with the Constitution and statutes enshrining civil rights and civil liberties, t he 
Office  of the  Director of National  Intelligence  (ODNI),  Department  of Homeland  
Security  (DHS),  and Department  of Justice  (DOJ)  should prioritize coordinated  efforts  to 
eliminate real  and perceived  barriers  to intelligence and information sharing between  
federal  law enforcement  and intelligence agencies.  ODNI,  DHS,  and DOJ  should ensure  
that federal  law enforcement  agencies  have  adequate  resources  to review  law 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  78 enforcement reporting for foreign intelligence value and disseminate that  intelligence to  
relevant  agencies  in a manner that protects law  enforcement sensitivities.  ODNI  and 
individual intelligence agencies  should proactively  review  foreign intelligence on drug 
and threat finance issues that may  be relevant to  or actionable by federal law  enforcement 
agencies  and ensure that information is  appropriately downgraded in classification  to 
permit  passage  to law enforcement partners.   
Information fusion centers  are crucial  to bridging information gaps,  but they  are effective 
only if  agencies  commit  to addressing the corresponding institutional and jurisdictional  
barriers that  too often plague these efforts. Agencies  challenged  by information gaps 
should thoroughly examine systems and mechanisms  across the interagency  environment 
for solutions prior to  embarking on individual agency  initiatives,  which  tend  to result in  
duplication  and, ultimately,  additional gaps  and seams.  Duplication  of initiatives  and 
activities  across the interagency  community  inhibits  the U.S.  Government’s ability  to 
reduce overdose deaths. The Office of National  Drug Control Policy  (ONDCP)  will 
prioritize funding recommendations  for agencies  demonstrating strategic effects  through 
systematized  sharing of information at enterprise levels.  
Consideration  should be  given to leveraging  the United States Council on Transnational 
Organized  Crime (US CTOC), established  on December  15, 2021 by Executive Order 
14060 to  improve the U.S.  Government’s ability  to carry out strategic drug intelligence 
functions. Sustainable funding for strategic drug intelligence efforts is  crucial.   
B. I mprove information sharing, vertically and horizontally, between public safety and 
public health entities to improve health outcomes and build health equity.  (Agencies 
Involved: DFC; DHS/ICE; DOJ/DEA, OCDETF, OJP; HHS/FDA, HHS; ONDCP)  
While there are several  individual examples  of initiatives  that bring together public safety  
and public health,  often in  states  or locally,  government at all levels  can do more.  Public 
safety  and public health  agencies  collect vast quantities  of data,  which  they  should share 
and integrate across both disciplines  to inform whole-of-government responses to  the 
problem.6 This  can and should be done if feasible while  still protecting the  privacy of  
individuals with  all affected persons and maintaining trust and confidence in the health 
care system. The most  effective public safety  and public health  collaboration and 
mechanisms  are those that  enable pursuit of the crim inals  trafficking  illicit substances in  
our communities  while  enhancing  the support structure for people who  use drugs or have 
SUD.  
Federal public safety  and public health  agencies  within  DOJ,  DHS,  and Department of 
Health and Human Services ( HHS ), and state governments should pursue common  and 
interoperable information systems to  enable more efficient  synthesis and analysis  of data 
at a national level.  For example,  standardized  reporting criteria for drug-related  deaths 
and contraband seizures,  combined  with  mechanisms  to integrate Tribal , local  and state 
agencies,  would provide a comprehensive,  national picture of the  effects  of illicit drugs 
on our communities.  This  would enable tailored, meaningful responses, such  as those 
 
6 An example of one such successful  collaboration is DEA’s  NFLIS -TOX program. More  information  about the 
program can be found at, https://www.nflis.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/tox.xhtml  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  79 achieved  through the  High  Intensity Drug Trafficking  Area’s (HIDTA)  Overdose 
Response Strategy.314 
C. Strengthen HIDTAs and other multi -jurisdictional task for ces to disrupt and 
dismantle drug trafficking organizations. (Agencies Involved:  DHS/CBP, ICE; 
DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI, OCDETF; IC; DOD; Treasury/FINCEN, IRS, OFAC, TFFC; 
USCG; USPIS)  
Drug trafficking organizations rely  on networks of facilitators  such  as money  laundering 
organizations, complicit  financial  institutions,  money service businesses (MSBs) and  
corrupt government officials  to traffic illicit drugs into  the United  States,  conceal  and 
launder their  illicit proceeds, purchase and distribute firearms , and move  them  across and 
out of the United  States.  Effectively  countering this  broad network of facilitators  requires HIDTA  Overdose Response  Strategy  
Public Health and Public Safety Collaboration Success  
The Overdose Response Strategy (ORS) is an unprecedented and unique collaboration between 
public health and public safety sectors, created to help local communities reduce overdoses by 
sharing timely data and innovative drug overdose prevention strategies. 
The mission of the ORS is to help communities reduce fatal and nonfatal overdoses by 
developing and sharing information about heroin, fentanyl, methamphetamine, and other drugs 
across agencies and by offering evidence- based intervention strategies.  The ORS is implemented 
by state teams made up of Drug Intelligence Officers (DIOs) and Public Health Analysts (PHAs) 
who swiftly exchange data, building the evidence for overdose prevention and response 
initiatives and allowing for earlier warnings and informed decision-making. DIOs working in the 
ORS track and relay information regarding sentinel arrests, seizures, and other incidents to law 
enforcement agencies at all levels of government. PHAs form a critical link across public health 
entities to share actionable information to identify and stop overdose events.   
Annual ORS Cornerstone Projects leverage this network to gather new information about 
emerging trends or promising strategies. One such project focused on overdose prevention 
services in jails.  PHAs and DIOs implemented surveys and interviews with justice professionals 
in 36 jails across 20 states to examine services in jails serving the counties most affected by the 
opioid overdose crisis. To increase the uptake of findings from this project, ORS teams worked 
directly with local partners on the development of jail-based overdose prevention programs to 
discuss best practices, helpful resources, and challenges. Teams also hosted webinars featuring 
how local champions from across the country built and implemented their own overdose 
prevention programs. This effort engaged more than 30 agencies and organizations about 
implementing or expanding local jail -based overdose prevention programs. These partners 
include sheriff’s offices, harm reduction groups, state substance use authorities, and state criminal 
justice agencies.  At least 12 local jails are current ly working with ORS teams to build naloxone 
distribution into their overdose prevention programming. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  80 an approach combining  the expertise,  perspectives,  and authorities  of federal,  state,  local,  
Tribal , and territorial  agencies , as well as foreign partners .  
Multi -jurisdictional  task forces, such  as the HIDTA task  forces, bring together  the 
resources, expertise,  and authorities  of federal,  state,  local,  Tribal , and territorial  
agencies.  These task forces  mitigate jurisdictional  challenges  for law  enforcement, such  
as investigations  on Tribal lands  and Tribal Trust lands that  straddle international  borders  
with Mexico  and Canada,  where  criminal  organizations  exploit  the gaps  and seams  
between  jurisdictions  to ply th eir trade.  
Agencies  within  DOJ,  DHS  and the  U.S.  Postal  Inspection Service (USPIS)  will 
prioritize  participation  in multi -agency  task forces  aligned  against  the manufacture and  
trafficking  of illicit  drugs;  including  the Organized  Crime Drug Enforcement  Task  Forces  
(OCDETF)  Strike  Forces  and Task  Forces,  DEA’s  Special  Operations  Division  (SOD),  
and HSI  Border Enforcement  Security  Task  Forces  (BESTs), to  disrupt  and dismantle the  
most  dangerous  transnational  criminal  organizations. Drug interdiction  agencies  at all 
levels  should seek  opportunities  to participate in  interagency  task forces  and information-
sharing initiatives  to maximize the impact  of finite interdiction  resources. National  Drug 
Control  Program  Agencies  must  develop  processes  and mechanisms  to enable  
intelligence-driven interdictions  targeted  against  organizations  of interest.  It is crucial  
that task forces  work with  their  assigned  interdicting  agencies  to develop  robust  and 
effective mechanisms  to exploit  information gleaned  from  interdiction  events  in a timely  
manner  in pursuit  of criminal  organizations.  Further, developing national  standards  for 
information systems  on which  federal  agencies  rely, such  as license plate readers,  will 

 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  81 improve  the efficiency  of coordinated efforts  within  and between  task forces  and help  
enable intelligence-driven interdiction  activities  supporting investigations  of criminal  
networks. Robust  policy  development  and oversight  will also be necessary  to ensure  that 
these systems  are not misused  and that individuals’  privacy  and civil liberties  are 
protected. DOJ,  DHS,  and USPIS should collaborate with  each  other  and with  industry 
partners  to identify  and pursue  systems  suitable for common  systems standards  
development.  
Principle 2: Deny and disrupt domestic production, 
trafficking, and distribution of illicit substances.  
Drug traffickers  exploit  our highways, railways,  airspace,  and our mail  and express  consignment  
systems  inside  the United  States  to distribute illicit  drugs  across  the nation  and move  illicit  
proceeds  and other  contraband, such  as weapons. Criminal  organizations  beyond the border 
possess well -established  distribution  networks  within  the United  States  developed  by partnering 
with or coopting local  criminal  organizations  in order to  expand distribution capacity  and 
capability.  The National  Interdiction  Command and Control  Plan  (NICCP) outlines  the 
Administration’s  approach to interdiction  beyond the  borders, in  the border regions, and inside  
the borders. The  activities  described  in the NICCP  should complement  the actions  below. 
A. Focus investigations on priority TCOs engaged in drug trafficking. (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ; DHS; USPIS)  
The Consolidated Priority Organizational  Target  (CPOT) and Regional  Priority 
Organizational  Target  (RPOT) Lists,  administered  by OCDETF , represent  the greatest  
transnational  criminal  threats  to the United  States.  Departments  and Agencies  should 
evaluate how  to use the full breadth  of their  authorities  and capabilities  to support  
enterprise  investigations  to disrupt  and dismantle these priority organizations  and their  
distribution networks  within  the United  States.  Agencies  conducting interdictions  should 
develop the  capability  to target  interdictions  against  CPOTs and RPOTs and to  assess the  
impacts  of interdictions  on CPOTs and RPOTs.  All federal  agencies  should support  
targeted  interdictions  against  CPOTs and RPOTS.  The effectiveness  of our limited  
interdiction,  investigative,  and prosecutorial  resources  should be  evaluated  and assessed  
through the  lens of defeating  these most  deleterious  organizations. ONDCP,  in 
consultation  with  the interagency,  will recommend  funding priorities  for initiatives  that 
demonstrably disrupt and degrade  CPOTs and RPOTs.  
B. Collaborate with the express consignment shipping industry and the U.S. Postal Service to deny drug traffickers success with those services.  (Agencies involved: 
DHS/CBP; ICE; USPIS)  
Drug traffickers  exploit  the mail system  and express  consignment  carriers  to cheaply,  
efficiently,  and reliably  distribute illicit  drugs, illicit  cash,  and other contraband across  
the nation. This  includes  delivering  illicit  drugs  directly  into the hands  of those  with  
SUDs . Addressing the  use of the  mail  system  and express  consignment  carriers  by drug 
traffickers  is therefore  both a public  safety  and a  public  health  imperative.  Appropriate  
federal  agency  collaboration with  express  consignment  carriers  will enable  analyses  of 
large  quantities  of national  data  in order to develop and standardize algorithms  for 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  82 identifying  and interdicting  suspect  parcels  while safeguarding individual  privacy  and 
proprietary carrier  information.  
Principle 3: Improve assessments of supply reduction 
initiative effectiveness and efficiency and allocate resources 
accordingly.  
Evaluating  the efficiency  and effectiveness  of supply reduction efforts  and policies  will highlight  
what  approaches  are most  impactful  and enable  a reprioritization  of resources  towards  the most  
promising programs, policies,  and innovations. We must  collaboratively  examine programs  
across  our various  international  and domestic lines  of effort, such  as eradication  of illicit  coca 
and poppy plants,  the raw materials  for cocaine and heroin, respectively;  initiatives  to bolster  
interdiction  capabilities  in drug source  and transit  countries,  whether  the narcotics  are moved by 
land, sea,  or air;  the results  of programs  designed to  incentivize and strengthen  licit economies  
within  partner  nations;  measures  to combat  drug-related  money  laundering;  and programs  to 
combat  drug sales  on the  internet.  We must  also use this process  to assess new  threats  and future  
changes  in the illicit  drug market  to ensure  that programs  and initiatives  effectively  and 
accurately  combat  the evolving threat.  
A. Strengthen assessments of supply reduction initiative outcomes against measurable 
goals. (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE, USCG; DOD; DOJ/DEA, FBI, OCDETF; DOS; IC; Treasury/FINCEN, IRS, OFAC, TFFC) 
Supply reduction initiatives  typically  require  substantial  investments  in personnel, funds, 
and material.  Thorough and pragmatic  assessment  of the  outcomes  achieved  by these 
initiatives  is necessary  to assess the  extent  to which  investment  of finite resources  
produces  meaningful  impacts.  Intelligence  Community and law  enforcement  information 
and analysis  are vital  to our understanding  of the  ‘start -to-finish’ drug production, 
movement,  and international  consumption  processes,  which  is crucial  to assessing  
effectiveness  of supply reduction initiatives.  The intelligence activities  of the  IC and 
federal  law enforcement  need  to be well  integrated  with  the work of select  overseas  
Embassies,  Combatant  Commanders  (especially  US Indo-Pacific Command, US  
Northern Command and US  Southern Command), state and local  entities,  HIDTAs,  and 
other fusion centers.  Federal  agencies  should further develop  their  capacity  to critically  
assess the  effectiveness  of suppl y reduction  initiatives  and programs, in  addition to  
monitoring activity  performance. Resources  should be  prioritized  for initiatives  
demonstrating strategic effects.   
B. Enhance supply reduction efficiency.  (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE, USCG; 
DOD; DOJ/DEA, FBI, OCDETF; DOS; IC; Treasury/FINCEN, IRS, OFAC, TFFC)  
We must  ensure  that we account  for efficiency  in our evaluation  and selection  of supply 
reduction efforts  in addition to  effectiveness,  prioritizing  demonstrably  efficient  efforts  
over others  when  effectiveness  and outcomes  are otherwise equal.  This  may  require  
developing new  metrics  and tools  for comparing supply reduction programs  and activities  
or combining those  that exist  in different  ways  to provide  a more  complete picture  of the  
return on investment  in the continuum  of supply reduction activities.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  83 Principle 4: Protect individuals and the environment at 
home from criminal exploitation by those associated with 
drug production and trafficking.  
The abundant  supply of illicit  substances  is costing  too many  American  lives  and causing  far too 
much  damage  to vulnerable communities  in the United  States  and around the  world. Global  drug 
trafficking  sustains  a vast domestic and international  criminal  ecosystem  that enables  corruption 
and destabilizes  partner  nations  abroad. These  illicit  substances  and corresponding criminality  
contribute  to a crisis  with  considerable national  security,  public  safety  and public  health  
implications  in the United  States,  the western  hemisphere,  and beyond. Furthermore,  we 
recognize  the full scope  of damaging activities  related  to illicit  drug trafficking  includes  
disproportionately detrimental  effects  on vulnerable  and underrepresented populations  at home  
and abroad and considerable harm  to the environment.  
A. Address the criminal destruction of our protected natural resources due to domestic 
marijuana grows on public land. (Agencies Involved: DHS; DOD/NGB, NRO; DOI/BLM, NPS, USFWS; DOJ/DEA; EPA; USDA/USFS) 
Illegal  outdoor marijuana cultivation  on public  and private  lands  causes  substantial  harm  
to the environment  and threatens  public  safety.
315 To procure  the water  needed  for the  
crops, illegal  growers  dam  and divert  rivers,  streams,  and creeks, and tap  springs, altering  
the watershed  and depriving the  habitat  and communities  downstream  of water.  The use 
of fertilizers,  herbicides, and pesticides  by illegal  marijuana growers  is also a serious  
threat  to wildlife,  habitat,  and humans  encountering these toxic  substances  and can  
complicate eradication  and reclamation  and remediation  efforts.316  
Some  of these substances  are so toxic that  they are banned or unavailable in  the United  
States,  but Homeland  Security  Investigations, the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  
(EPA), and other federal  and state agencies  report  they  are smuggled into  the country by 
trafficking  organizations  from  abroad. Environmental  analyses  of lands  within  national  
parks  and forests  that had been  used  for marijuana grow  operations  show  significant  
environmental  degradation  stemming  from  chemical  pollution  and poor waste 
management  and that  contaminants  from  these  operations  are poisoning native  animal  
species,  including several  endangered species.317 
To protect  the environment  and preserve  our nation’s  public  lands  and forests,  federal,  
state,  local  agencies  must  continue  to act against  the criminal  destruction  of our protected  
natural  resources  through eradication  missions,  investigations  and prosecutions, and 
reclamation  efforts. We must  also improve  our ability  to identify grow  sites  under 
cultivation  before  the illegal  growers  can spray them  with  extremely  toxic chemicals.  
This will enable law enforcement  officers  to avoid exposure  to chemicals  such  as 
carbofuran, improve  the efficiency  of eradication  efforts, and reduce  the negative 
environmental  impacts  of illegal  marijuana grows.  
ONDCP  and partner agencies  will strongly encourage  prosecutors  to seek  appropriate 
federal penalties  for illegal  marijuana grow  operations  on public  lands, especially  those  
involving firearms  violations,  environmental  violations,  export  of prohibited toxicants,  
and endangerment  of wildlife based upon the fact -specific characteristics of the offender 
and the offense . ONDCP  will also continue to  convene  the Public  Lands  Drug Control  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  84 Committee (PLDCC), the  only federal  interagency  group that  coordinates  programs  to 
support  marijuana eradication  operations  and investigations  on public  lands, as  well  as 
related  intelligence and information sharing. Additionally, agencies  must  reduce  the 
backlog of reclamation  sites,  including  increasing  reclamation  of previous  season  grow  
sites.  
We must  leverage the  full capabilities  of the  U.S.  Government  to reduce  the supply of 
illicit  substances.  This  requires  fresh thinking, as  well  as the adoption of evidence-based  
approaches  to improve  our whole -of-government  approach to drug trafficking, and its  
direct  and indirect  effects  on communities  at home  and abroad. The  complexity  and 
diffusion of illicit  drug supply chains, criminal  drug trafficking organizations, and their 
networks  of facilitators  demands  a renewed commitment  by agencies  to pool  resources  
and work collaboratively  to maximize the  effects  of our limited  resources  against  drug 
manufacturing and trafficking  organizations  with  nearly  limitless  resources. This  includes  
taking  greater  risks  by more  openly sharing information across  federal,  state,  local,  
Tribal , and territorial  agencies  and prioritizing  resources  for those  agencies  that do so.  It 
also means  prioritizing  resources  for programs  that incentivize information sharing and 
that enhance  collaboration vertically  and horizontally  across  agencies  as it is clear  that 
the volume  and pace  of TCO  activity  far exceeds  the pace  presently achievable by 
individual  public  safety  and public  health  mechanisms.  The United  States  must  set an 
example as  a leader  in world efforts  to counter  these crimina l organizations  and their  
facilitators  and reduce  the harms  associated  with illicit  drugs.  
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  85 Reduce the Supply of Illicit Substances 
through International Engagement 
National Security  and l aw enforcement agencies  at all levels —federal,  state,  local,  Tribal, and 
territorial —work to  combat  drug trafficking  with  the goal of protecting Americans  from a lethal  
drug supply contributing to  record levels  of fatal  drug overdoses. However, traffickers continue 
to refine their methods and adopt new  techniques for delivering  illicit drugs to  our communities.  
The majority  of illicit drugs consumed in the United  States  are produced abroad by TCOs  and 
smuggled into the country. Large TCOs,  wherever they  are based,  threaten  the health  and safety  
of our communities  by exposing our citizens  to illicitly  manufactured  substances.  These include 
synthetic drugs, such  as fentanyl and methamphetamine,  and cultivated drugs like heroin and 
cocaine.  The plentiful  supply and widespread  availability  of high potency  illicit drugs fuel drug 
consumption across all sectors of American  society.  Large scale national drug markets, 
especially  those containing synthetic opioids, lead  to increased  overdose deaths and drug use —
impacting  millions  of American  families.  This drug use  also contributes  to significant economic 
costs  for individuals and employers.  Moreover, drug trafficking sustains vast  domestic and 
international criminal  enterprises  that fund a range of illicit activities,  enable corruption, 
undermine governance, and have  a destabilizing  effect on partner  nations, as  well as create 
opportunities for malign  actors to  gain  footholds in  fragile states  and among vulnerable 
populations. The  organization Global Financial  Integrity estimated  that,  in 2014, the manufacture 
and trafficking of illicit drugs generated  some  $426-652 billion  dollars for TCOs worldwide, 
more than  a third of the total value of transnational  organized crime.318 Large and influential 
TCOs  pose a threat  to our national security  and effectively  responding to their  illicit  
manufacturing, trafficking and distribution  methods is  an Administration  priority.7 Countering 
corruption and its deleterious impact,  including its  role in facilitating  transnational crime,  is a 
core national security  interest  of the  U.S.  government.  
The U.S.  must  strengthen international partnerships and foster bilateral exchanges  to 
collaboratively  address drug-related  problems as  a shared responsibility.  The increasingly 
dynamic and complex  nature of the international  illicit drug trade demands  enhanced  cooperation 
with international partners that  reflects  the reality  of a globalized  supply chain  for illicit  drugs 
and their  precursor chemicals.  In addition  to confronting TCOs ' illicit  drug manufacturing and 
trafficking  activities  directly,  the U.S. must  also pursue the financial  enablers  of this  illicit  
activity  to deny  TCOs  their  ill-gotten  proceeds and to  disrupt their ability  to transfer working 
capital  to fund their range of illicit activities  including procuring precursor ingredients,  
trafficking, bribery, and corruption. A global approach is  essential  since traffickers  exploit 
national boundaries to  insulate their operations and limit  the impact of any single nation’s control 
efforts. 319 These international initiatives  will also include a revitalized  effort to  leverage the 
significant  capabilities  of multilateral organizations and frameworks that are able to  accomplish  
actions  that no single government can achieve alone.  This  is true across all drug threats,  but 
 
7 See E.O. on Establishing  the United  States  Council on Transnational Organized  Crime,  
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing- room/presidential-actions/2021/12/15/executive-order-on- establishing -the-
united- states -council-on-transnational- organized -crime/ an d Fact Sheet  on Establishing  the Fight Against Corruption 
as a Core  U.S. National  Security  Interest,  https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing- r oom/statements -
releases/2021/06/03/fact- sheet -establishing-the-fight- against -corruption- as-a-core-u-s-national -security -interest/  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  86 particularly  for the challenge posed by the synthetic opioids  supply chain  that stretches  around 
the globe.  
Four principal lines  of international  effort  are necessary  to reduce  the supply of illicit  substances  
and decrease the  harms  caused  by these substances  in the United  States  and abroad:  
• Strengthen foreign partnerships  to address  drug production and trafficking  as a common 
and shared responsibility.  
• Obstruct  and disrupt  financial  activities  of TCOs  that manufacture illicit  drugs  and traffic 
them  into the United  States , including by countering corruption.  
• Leverage the  influence of multilateral  organizations  and other bilateral relationships to  
tackle shared challenges  related  to synthetic  drugs. 
• Protect  individuals  and the  environment  abroad from  criminal  exploitation  by those  
associated  with  drug production and trafficking.  
These lines  of international  effort  are complemented  by the  activities  outlined  in the Southwest, 
Northern, and Caribbean  Border Counternarcotics  Strategies,  and by the National  Interdiction 
Command and Control  Plan,  which  collectively  serve  as companions  to the National Drug 
Control Strategy . This compendium  of documents  provides  strategic guidance  linking 
international  efforts  with  domestic efforts  to reduce  the supply of illicit  substances  within  our 
communities.  
Principle 1: Strengthen foreign partnerships to address drug 
production and trafficking as a common and shared 
responsibility.  
Strengthening foreign partnerships  is a crucial  element  in our efforts  to reduce  the supply of 
illicit  substances  in America’s  communities.  Analyses  indicates  that criminal  organizations  in 
Mexico  supply most  of the  cocaine (after sourcing it from Colombia), methamphetamine,  heroin 
and illicitly  manufactured fentanyl  smuggled into  the United  States320 and have  increased  their  
production of fentanyl  and its  analogues,  using precursor chemicals  sourced primarily from  the 
PRC .321 Additionally, over 90 percent  of the  cocaine seized  and tested  in the United  States  is 
produced in  Colombia.322  
TCOs  remain  the greatest  criminal  threat  to the United  States:  they control  lucrative smuggling 
corridors  across  the region to  bring tons  of illicit  drugs  across  our borders  every year.323 Once  in 
the United  States,  the drugs  are delivered  to consumer markets  using vast  transportation and 
distribution routes  those  criminal  organizations  oversee  and control.324 Consistent  with  the 
Administration’s  National  Security  Strategic Guidance, we  will engage  with  key partners  and 
collaborate on tangible and sustainable efforts  to combat  drug production and trafficking from  all 
its global  sources. We will  expand our approach beyond capacity  building  by advancing 
economic  opportunity for the  most  vulnerable within  these countries, providing state  presence  
and security  that adheres  to the rule of law  and human rights, combatting  transnational  criminal  
networks, countering corruption, and reducing illicit  drug production consistent  with  partner 
nation  and United  States  law.  We will  prioritize Asian  and Latin  American  countries  with the 
most direct effect on drug trafficking and use in the United  States  and will  draw  upon long-
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  87 standing relationships  with  like-minded  partners  in Asia,  the Western  Hemisphere,  and Europe, 
along with  supporting the work of multilateral  organizations, to  address  the changing  dynamics  
and increasing  sophistication  of the global  drug trade.  
A. Develop holistic approaches for engaging with Asian and Latin American countries 
with a direct effect on drug trafficking in the United States. (Agencies Involved:  DHS; 
DOD; DOJ; DOS; HHS; IC/NSC; Treasury; USAID; USPIS) 
Within  drug producing countries, there  is a substantial  correlation  between  areas  lacking  
in development  programs  that reach  the most  vulnerable  and impoverished citizens  and 
the presence  of TCOs.325 The United  States  Agency for International  Development  
(USAID)  focuses  on strengthening legal  economies  in rural, underdeveloped, and post -
conflict  areas  via projects  that focus  on expanding land  titling,  increasing  the 
competitiveness  of licit  goods , and establishing  agricultural  value  chains  through market  
analyses  and development  assistance.  USAID also  offers  technical  assistance to rural  
producers  and organizations  to improve  the productivity of licit  crops  and increase rural  
smallholder  sales.  These efforts  have  helped  local  organizations  become effective and 
reliable partners  in the planning and implementation  of sustainable socio -economic  
development  initiatives  and have  helped  provide  former coca growers  with  a viable  and 
licit income source.326 The Department  of State lead s the United  States  government’s  
efforts  to reduce  the production of drugs  outside  the United  States  by pursuing 
partnerships  to disrupt  the flow  of drugs  into the United  States,  and help  mitigate the  
consequences  of drug trafficking such  as violence,  criminality,  corruption, and human 
exploitation  in our global  partner  nations.  
B. Support Mexico’s efforts to strengthen its counter -drug institutions and initiatives.  
(Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, USCG, ICE; DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI, OCDETF; DOD; 
DOS; TREASURY)  
Mexico  is a prim ary source  country for the cultivation,  production, and shipment  of 
heroin and illicit  marijuana,  as well  as a key country in  the production and movement  of 
synthetic drugs  and the movement  of cocaine into the United States . 327 The Governments  
of the  United  States  and Mexico  have  developed  a common  understanding of the  negative 
economic,  security,  and public  health  impact  of transnational  criminal  organizations  in 
the production and trafficking of illicit  substances.  With  Mexico,  we must  continue  to 
expand cooperation to  address  common  threats.  Both governments  agree that reducing 
the supply of illicit drugs is  a shared responsibility.  
Mexico  is working to  eradicate poppy fields  more  effectively,  destroy clandestine 
laboratories,  and inter dict heroin and other  illicit  drugs  before  they  reach  the U.S.  border. 
ONDCP  will continue  to use the Heroin/Fentanyl  Working Group (HFWG)  as a means  to 
coordinate  Embassy  Mexico  City  and U.S.  interagency  efforts  in Mexico. Despite 
challenges  stemming  from  Mexico’s  2020  national  security  law,  the interagency  will 
leverage our partnership with  Mexican  law enforcement  officers, analysts,  chemists,  
investigators, prosecutors, and military  personnel  to identify  and safely  dismantle 
clandestine drug laboratories  and bring those responsible to justice .328 In particular,  we 
will work to  establish  an agreed  United  States -Mexico  poppy eradication  program, a  
shared eradication  goal, and a  joint strategy  for intelligence-driven eradication  in Mexico.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  88 The Department of State, ONDCP , and other federal  agencies  have  also been  working 
with the Government  of Mexico  to address  maritime port  security , including through the 
NADD. Improving port  security  would curtail  the diversion of import ed of chemicals  
used to make illicit  drugs, thus  inhibiting synthetic  drug production. Steps  to improve  
port security  include professionalizing security  forces, reducing corruption and 
criminality  at key ports, increasing  awareness  of the  types  of chemicals  that authorities  
should seize,  and improving insight  into the evolving nature  of the precursor 
environment.329 Improving port  security  can also mitigate the  movement  of illicit  
weapons  and proceeds, ultimately  denying  operational  resources  to the TCOs.   
Respecting  the sovereignty of Mexico,  we will continue  to pursue  efforts  beyond 
capacity -building initiatives  with  Mexico  to address  shared responsibility to  foster 
equitable regional  development.  The Bicentennial Framew ork modernizes U.S.-Mexico 
security cooperation to confront existing and new challenges, including the accelerating 
drug overdose deaths in the United States driven by illicit drugs and associated violence and criminality in Mexico.  Through the Framework, the U.S. and Mexican interagencies 
will increase joint efforts to combat synthetic drugs and other illicit drug production, better understand and reduce drug demand in the United States and Mexico, increase interdiction of drugs, pursue TCO prosecutions and illicit finance, and reduce the number of illicit firearms crossing the U.S. -Mexico border, among other issues.  
C. Work with the PRC to strengthen control of the production, diversion, and transshipment of illicit synthetic drugs and their precursors.  (Age ncies Involved:  
DHS; DOD; DOJ; DOS; HHS; IC/NSC; Treasury; USAID; USPIS)  
A significant  volume  of non-fentanyl  opioids  and precursor chemicals  used  to produce  
fentanyl, fentanyl  analogues,  and other  synthetic drugs  originate  in the People’s  Republic  
of China  (PRC). This  assessment  is supported by seizure evidence,  law enforcement  
investigations,  internet  sales  information, and judicial actions  in the United  States,  PRC, 
and Mexico.
330 Increased  collaboration with  the PRC on shared drug priorities  can 
disrupt  drug trafficking networks, along with  the corrupt  or compromised  systems  that 
support  them,  and reduce  the availability  of dangerous  synthetic  drugs  in the United  
States.  The United  States  will continue  engagement with  the PRC to  reduce  diversion of 
uncontrolled precursor chemicals to the illicit production and trafficking of synthetic  
drugs  destined  for markets  in the United  States,  while  also working with  impacted  third  
countries . 
D. Work with Colombia to reduce production and trafficking of cocaine while increasing alternative economic opportunities.  (Agencies Involved: DOD; DOJ/DEA, 
OCDETF; DOS; IC/NSC; Treasury, USAID, USCG, WHA)  
Colombia  remains  a stalwart  partner  of the  United  States  and one  of our strongest  and 
most  reliable  allies  in the region. Recent  data suggest  that the current  level  of effort  of 
manual  eradication  alone  is insufficient  to reverse  the coca cultivation  that provides  the 
raw material  for cocaine production in Colombia. In fact,  both raw  coca  production and  
estimated  total  cocaine production in Colombia  have  more  than tripled  since 2012.
 331 To 
reverse  this upward trend, the  U.S.  government, in  partnership with  the Colombian 
government, will  implement  an integrated  counterdrug plan  that supports  stability,  
prosperity, capacity -building, and a strong  bilateral  partnership. This  whole  of 
government  effort  will support  and emphasize increases  in environmentally-safe  illicit  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  89 crop eradication,  alternative development,  interdiction,  rural security, environmental 
protection, investigation s and prosecutions, judicial support, and public health  
cooperation. Since coca fields differ in  their level  of productivity, this approach will  be 
most  successful  if we focus in  areas  of high -yield  coca cultivation. 332 Unfortunately, 
these areas  generally  have  limited  government services  and lingering security  concerns, 
and will require concerted  effort over several years to  reverse the continued  rise in 
cocaine production. Consequently, U.S.  government efforts must  be closely  tied to 
measurable outcomes, sustainable over  the long term and designed  to complement  
Colombia’s national counterdrug strategy.  
E. Foster improved international drug control and alternative development in Peru.  
(Agencies Involved: DOD; DOJ/DEA, OCDETF; DOS; IC; Treasury; USAID; WHA) 
Peru, despite being the world’s second largest  producer of cocaine,  is a steady  partner  in 
the fight against  coca cultivation  and illicit drug trafficking. 333 The Biden-Harris 
Administration  will apply a comprehensive approach, working with  the Government of 
Peru. Eradication  remains  a valuable tool in reducing coca cultivation  in Peru, but the 
root causes  of illicit crop cultivation  must  also be addressed. In addition to  supporting 
eradication,  U.S.  efforts will focus on bringing security  and state services,  transportation 
infrastructure, and alternative livelihoods to  the coca -growing regions of Peru, providing 
incentives  for rural farmers to  leave the  often -dangerous work of coca cultivation  in favor 
of safe  and profitable licit livelihoods. Much  of this  work will be done through INL  and 
USAID programming in  the country, as  well  as continued  support for Peru’s National  
Commission  for Development and Life without Drugs (DEVIDA).  
F. S trengthen Ecuador’s drug control, law enforcement, and developmental initiatives. 
(Agencies Involved: DOD; DOJ/DEA, OCDETF; DOS; IC; Treasury; USAID; USCG; 
WHA)   
Ecuador, although not a cocaine producing country, constitutes  one of the primary  
cocaine trafficking  regions in  South America.  Cocaine is transported from Colombia and 
across Ecuador’s porous borders to  Ecuador’s coast for illegal maritime smuggling. 334 In 
Ecuador, we  will also seek  to engage the  Ecuadorian government and collaborate in  
developing a comprehensive counterdrug plan. This  approach will  focus on augmenting  
Ecuador’s capacity  and capability  to surveil, monitor and interdict the  illicit movement of 
drugs over land, air,  and sea.  It is the U.S.  Government’s goal to help  Ecuador  diminish  
illicit  drug trafficking by increasing  seizures  in the Ecuadorian Economic Exclusion Zone 
(EEZ), 8 on the country’s coasts  and inland  by 50-percent over  the next three years.    
G. Intensify cooperation with India to preemptively address precursor chemical and illicit pharmaceutical diversion, production, and trafficking.  (Agencies Involved: 
DHS; DOD; DOJ; DOS; HHS/FDA; IC/NSC; Treasury; USAID; USPIS)  
India represents a potential sou rce for precursor chemicals  used  to make  synthetic drugs. 
India is  the leading  generic drug manufacturer in  the world. This commercial 
 
8 Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)  as defined  by United  Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),  Part 
V. https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf . Based  on United  Nations 
Educational, Scientific  and Cultural Organization  UNESCO,  the Ecuador EEZ covers  approximately 1,150,000 
squared  km, which  is approximately 200nm off the contiguous coast  of Ecuador and the area surrounding the 
Galapagos  (approximately 600nm off the coast).  http://msp.ioc -unesco.org/world- applications/americas/ecuador/  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  90 infrastructure, and the combination  of technical  expertise  and chemical  source  supplies  in 
India, is  exploited  by drug traffickers  to source  synthetic  drugs  and precursor chemicals  
destined  for markets  in the United  States  and other regions  globally.  
The United  States  Government  and the  Government  of India  (GOI)  understand the 
importance of counternarcotics  engagement  and regular consultation on narcotics  matters.  
The creation  of the  Counternarcotics  Working Group (CNWG)  and the  development  of a 
bilateral  framework demonstrates  our shared  commitment  to strengthening  meaningful  
partnership and engagement  between  our two  nations. 
This bilateral  framework will  allow  the USG  and the  GOI  to work together  on curtailing  
the production of narcotics,  reducing drug  related  crime,  expanding the awareness  of the  
dangers  of illicit  substance  and its  associated  harms, and will  build on the existing  
bilateral  relationship  between  both  countries.  
H. Support international partners as they address drug production and interdiction 
issues across the global drug market.  (Agencies Involved: DHS; DOD; DOJ; DOS; IC) 
The global  illicit  drug market  has resulted  in an increasingly  large number of countries  
that are not  directly  involved in drug trafficking into, and use  in the United  States,  but 
which  play  substantial  roles  in the global  flow  of illicit  drugs  and precursor chemicals . 
The illicit  drug industries  in these nations, be  it manufacturing or trafficking and 
transshipment,  provide  substantial  illicit  operating  capital  to TCOs  that affect  the United  
States  directly  and indirectly  by their  range  of illegal  activities,  including  bribery and  
corruption of government  officials.  We must  be mindful  of the transshipment  roles  
played  by Guatemala,  Honduras, and El Salvador, forming the  Northern Triangle,  along 
with the destabilizing  effects  drug trafficking  organizations  have  in these countries. 335 
Similarly,  Golden Triangle nations  Thailand, Laos,  and Burma and countries  like 
Afghanistan serve  as points  of origin and transshipment  for drugs  including heroin, 
hashish, and methamphetamine bound for markets  worldwide. It is also imperative that  
we maintain  a vigilant  eye on illicit  narcotics  flows  throughout  the Middle East,  Africa, 
Europe, and Asia,  as well  as the possible  emergence  of new  TCOs . For example, the new 
Afghan government’s ultimate posture on illicit drug production and trafficking remains to be seen, which leave open the possibility that a permissive environment for TCOs will 
develop.  
The United  States  must  identify and engage  like- minded  nations  as partners  to confront  
illicit  drug manufacturing and trafficking  world-wide  and deny TCOs  safe havens  from  
which  to ply their  trade.  Bilateral  agreements  that enhance coordination and cooperation 
amongst  law enforcement  agencies  of partner nations  should be  prioritized. Moreover, 
the United  States  should work with  like-minded partners  to amplify  mutually  held  
priorities  in multilateral  fora. Organizations  such  as The Interdiction Committee (TIC) 
should leverage the  authorities  and capabilities  of its  member  agencies  to enhance 
interdiction  and capacity -building initiatives  within  transshipment  nations  for drugs  
bound for the  United  States.  Support  provided to  international  partners  should be  
complemented  by robust  assessments  of effectiveness  and accountability  for measurable 
outcomes.  The United States will also work with multilateral organizations, such as the 
UNODC and the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), to shed light on and respond to trafficking t rends and enhance international cooperation.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  91 Principle 2: Obstruct and disrupt financial activities of 
transnational criminal organizations that manufacture illicit 
drugs and traffic them into the United States.  
The ingenuity  of drug traffickers  is undeni able:  from  smuggling drugs  across  the southwest  
border on rail cars using well -engineered  ventilated  tunnels, to  capitalizing  on the  massive  
volume  of traffic  flowing through the ports  of entry in  order to obscure  contraband, to building 
semi -submersibles  in the jungles  of South America.  However,  the traffickers ' ultimate goal  is not 
getting  drugs  to market  in the United  States , but getting  usable profits  back  to fund the illicit  
activ ities of the  TCOs.  The vast quantities  of illicit  drugs  smuggled throughout  the world 
generate  enormous  revenue, which  must  be moved and laundered  so that traffickers  can 
perpetuate  the illicit  enterprise.  While bulk cash  smuggling remains  one of the predominant  
method s for moving illicit  proceeds , trade -based  money laundering (TBML) such as Black -
Market  Peso  Exchanges,  and mirror transfers  via informal  networks  are also used. Additionally, 
TCOs are  growing more  comfortable  with  darknet  markets  and the  use of virtual  assets  to 
launder funds, although the  size and scope  of drug proceeds  generated  on the  darknet  and 
laundered via  virtual  assets  remain  low in comparison to  cash-based  retail  street  sales .336 
TCOs  require  funds  to operate their illicit  supply chains  and exert  their  transnational  corruptive  
influence. We  must  use and strengthen  every  available tool  and seek  new  tools  to uncover 
financial  networks  and obstruct  and disrupt  the illicit  financial  activities  that fund TCOs  that 
traffic  illicit  drugs  into the United  States.  
A. Enhance international partners' financial tools to target trafficking groups and 
deny them illicit drug proceeds.  (Agencies Involved:  DOJ/OCDETF; DOS, Treasury/ 
IRS, TFI) 
TCOs  generate tens of billions  of dollars  in illicit  proceeds  through control  of the  drug 
trade  that puts  dangerous  illicit  drugs  onto  streets  in the United States . While the  revenue  
is generated  from  the sale of illicit  drugs  in the United  States,  illicit proceeds generated 
by wholesalers or larger transnational drug trafficking organizations must  ultimately  be 
moved and laundered out  of the  United  States  and back  to the TCOs  where  they  are used 
to fund the  cycle of  illicit  activity  and facilitate corruption and malign  influence.  We 
must  work with  our international  partners  to deny TCOs  the illicit  proceeds  that fund 
their operations  by enhancing anti -money laundering regulations  and international  
standards. By working with  vulnerable  nations  to enhance  these regulations  we can make 
it more  challenging  for TCOs,  and the  money  laundering organizations  that support  them,  
to launder illicit  proceeds  and turn illicit  drug revenue  into operating  capital.  By denying  
TCOs  the operating capital  to purchase  precursor chemicals  we would impact  the illicit  
drug trade  far upstream  of the  street  retail  environment. As per Strategic Objective 5.8 of 
the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption, w e must  also consider the role of third -party 
enablers  of illic it finance such  as complicit lawyers  and law  firms, accountants, 
realtors/real  estate firms,  title insurers, art  dealers,  and other commercial enterprises and 
individuals that  facilitate the  illicit  economy  in source  and transshipment  countries.9 
 
9 “The U.S. Government will prioritize the development of a common understanding of corruption risks through 
joint analyses that outline corruption dynamics, networks, and nodes; consider enablers and drivers of corrupt 
behavior; examine the potential impac t of providing foreign assistance (including security sector assistance); and 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  92 B. Combat Transnational Criminal Organizations’ financial structures and target 
their illicit proceeds.  (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE; DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI, 
HIDTA, OCDETF; DOS; IC; DOD; Treasury/FINCEN, OFAC, TFFC, IRS)  
Street -level  sales  of ill icit drugs  are largely  conducted with  cash.337 The manufacture, 
transport, and sale  of illicit  drugs  involve  multiple transactions  that requir e the laundering 
of illicit finances across  national, regional, and international  boundaries  via multiple 
methodologies .338 These methodologies can include tax amnesties, casinos and gambling, 
transaction laundering, bank capture, shell companies and trusts, structuring, cash-intensive businesses, trade-based money laundering (TBML), commodity investment, round-tripping, cyber-laundering, and bulk cash smuggling (BCS). Tax amnesties, round -
tripping, shell companies and trusts, and investments in commodities are often conducted in countries or regions with weak anti -money laundering regimes.  TCOs take advantage 
of these weak jurisdictional controls and are able to move illicit finances with little scrutiny by law enforcement. BCS remains the primary illicit finance transfer of choice among TCOs, though due to the COVID -19 pandemic law enforcement personnel have 
witnessed an increase in TBML and an increased use of virtual currency and other digital 
assets to launder illicit funds.  Reports from program implementation partners and law 
enforcement personnel that are part of DOS managed programs have shown a movement towards TBML and virtual currency transfers. TCOs have been stockpiling cash due to travel restrictions affecting their ability to move currency across international borders. TCOs use a variety of means to transfer value across international borders’ inclu ding 
traditional BCS couriers, passenger vehicles, shipping containers, and high value gems, minerals, and metals shipped via mail or express consignment. Virtual currencies continue  to grow  in popularity with  TCOs,  but their  use is still relatively  nascen t 
compared  to BCS and other money laundering methods . Virtual currencies are  mainly  
traded  via private investors;  yet, due to the relative ease  in trading these currencies,  TCOs  
often use  this form  of transaction  as a mechanism  to move  money quickly  and then  shift  
it back  to cash.
339 
The Bank Secrecy  Act (BSA) underlies the  federal  government’s  role in working to  
inhibit  TCOs  and their  financial  structures.340 The Anti -Money Laundering (AML)  Act of 
2020 is  one of the  most  significant  pieces  of legislation  enacted  in recent  years  to thwart  
illicit  financial  actors.341 In addition to the 2020 National  Strategy  to Combat  Terrorism  
and other Illicit  Financing,342 the AML  Act seeks  to strengthen, modernize, and 
streamline the existing AML regime by promoting innovation, regulatory reform, and industry engagement through forums, such as the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group 
(BSAAG) and FinCEN Exchange. The 2021 U.S. Strategy to Counter Corruption 
incorporates a similar focus.  Public -private  partnerships  are key tools in addressing the 
illicit finance threat . The Department  of the  Treasury should continue to  engage  with  the 
private  sector  via public -private partnerships  as they  implement  the AML  Act.  
C. Enhance public -private partnership frameworks to more effectively combat the 21st 
Century Drug Market.  (Agencies Involved: DHS/ICE; DOJ/DEA, DOS, HIDTA, 
OCDETF; Treasury/FINCEN) 
 
identify possible entry points or levers to shift the dynamics of corruption in order to incentivize reform.” U.S. 
Strategy on Countering Corruption, Strategic Objective 5.4  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  93 Drug trafficking into the United  States  is a long and complex  process  involving 
manufacture, concealment,  movement,  purchase, and delivery  that often starts  and ends  
outside  the United  States  with  procurement  of raw  materials  and the  return of illicit  
proceeds, respectively.  In 2019, FinCEN  worked with  ONDCP  and 11 federal  partners  to 
release a series  of advisories  to crack  down on international  synthetic  opioid trafficking  
and increase information sharing with  the private  sector  to disrupt  the synthetic  opioid 
supply chain.  These private-sector  advisori es allow  domestic and foreign businesses to  
better  protect  themselves  and their  supply chains  from  inadvertently  supporting drug  
trafficking, explain  how  fentanyl  traffickers  exploit  their  businesses and their  supply  
chains  to move  and market  deadly  drugs, and foster deeper  public -private collaboration to  
curb the  production and sale of illicit  fentanyl, fentanyl  analogues, and other  synthetic  
opioids.343 Each  advisory addresses  one of four critical  stages  of illicit  drugs  trafficking:  
o Manufacturing: Aims  to broaden the  public  and private  sectors ' awareness  of 
various  indicators  of potential  illicit  fentanyl  manufacturing and distribution;344 
o Marketing:  Provides  information for digital  private  sector  partners  about  
marketing  and sale  tactics  of illicit  fentanyl  via social  media,  online  forums, and 
e-commerce platforms;345 
o Movement: Identifies  methods  of intercepting  illicit  transportation of fentanyl  
and other illicit  synthetic opioids;  and 346 
o Money: Focuses on financial  institutions  and their  role in detecting  and reporting 
illicit  financial  schemes  aimed  to disguise  opioid trafficking  activities.347 
The DEA e -commerce outreach  program  is intended  to reduce  the availability  of 
dangerous  and often fatal counterfeit  prescription drugs  in the United  States  by educating  
retailers  about  the sale of pill  presses and components  used  in the production of illicit  and 
often deadly  counterfeit  pills.348 
Principle 3: Leverage the influence of multilateral 
organizations to tackle shared challenges from synthetic 
drugs.  
The illicit  drug trade is a global  transnational  problem  that harms  the citizens  of source  countries,  
transshipment  countries, and consuming destination countries  in varied  and unique  ways.  All 
agencies  and the  international  community  need  to continuously monitor  and evaluate  the 
effectiveness  of efforts  to combat  drug trafficking and the direct  and indirect  effects  of the illicit 
drug trade on communities  at home  and abroad. 
A. Utilize internat ional fora to strengthen drug control cooperation and address 
international drug policy priorities, especially pressing threats related to the 
manufacturing and trafficking of synthetic drugs. (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP; DOJ; DOS; DOD; HHS; ONDCP; USPIS) 
The rapidly  shifting global  drug market  confirms  the importance of working with  
international  partners  to respond to  pressing  drug issues.  Bilateral  efforts  are effective  in 
addressing more  limited  situations,  but in recent years, the United States has increasingly 
turned to multilateral fora to help reduce the international manufacturing and trafficking 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  94 of dangerous synthetic drugs. These multilateral drug policy fora bring together a wider  
community  of partners w illing  to work in  concert to address global drug policy issues and 
improve the  health  and welfare of communities  around the world. To  support the 
objectives  of the National Drug  Control Strategy,  harness the collective power of the  
global community , and promote effective outcomes,  the Department of State should 
continue leveraging key international organizations to promote sharing of data on 
emerging trends, exchange best practices to address the broad range of issues associated with the illicit global drug market, and press for an enhanced focus on addressing the proliferation of synthetic drugs. In particular, the Department of State should use the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the decision-making body for anti-drug efforts by the United N ations, to promote U.S. drug control priorities and hold our international 
partners accountable for their responsibility to help stem the flow of illicit synthetic drugs. The Department of State, with support from federal partners, should also accelerate efforts in these multilateral fora to place new psychoactive substances and uncontrolled or designer precursor chemicals under international control and urge the Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD) and the INCB to rapidly review priority substances and chemicals of concern for international control on a regular basis.  
B. Draw upon long -standing relationships with like -minded partners in Asia, the 
Western Hemisphere, and Europe to address the changing dynamics and increasing sophistication of the global drug trade, through regional multilateral fora. (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE; DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI; DOS; Treasury; USPIS) 
Regional multilateral fora provide important venues to advance U.S. policy priorities 
with likeminded partners in key regions such as Asia, the Western Hemisphere, and Europe and ensure effective implementation of international drug control conventions. This includes engagement through the NADD, OAS/CICAD, the U.S.-EU Political Dialogue on Drugs, and the Five Eyes.  
During the June 2016 North American  Leaders  
Summit  (NALS),  the heads of government from 
the United  States,  Mexico, and Canada agreed  to 
establish  the trilateral  NADD to  address current 
and emerging  drug threats  facing North America.
 
349 In 2021, members to NALS reaffirmed their 
commitment, pledging to continue the NADD and 
establish objectives defining a comprehensive approach to address the global illicit drug environment.
350 The annual meetings  are held  at 
the Assistant  Secretary  level,  and throughout the 
year trilateral  trainings, study tours, and 
information exchanges  occur at the subject  matter  
expert level.  The NADD brings together  law 
enforcement and health  officials from all  three 
countries to  address the many  facets  of the  
transnational  opioid overdose epidemic , illicit psychostimulant threats  facing each  
country, and the  broader drug crisis  facing North America.  Because of its  composition  
and collaborative nature,  the NADD has proven able to respond to  the dynamics of the  The U.S. -Canada Joint Action  
Plan on Opioids is  a key 
mechanism to  address the 
changing dynamics of the  drug 
trade affecting  both countries. 
Agreed to  by the President and 
Prime Minister,  the Action  Plan  
was formally  launched  in 
Washington, D.C. January 31, 
2020 and establishes  a bilateral  
steering  committee and three 
working groups focused on law  
enforcement, border security, 
and health.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  95 illicit  drug marketplace and produce results  in a timely  manner, and the leaders  of all  
three countries have spoken about its  value.   
The US -EU Political Dialogue on Drugs is  a bi-annual mechanism to coordinate and 
advance drug policy  priorities, including  in advance of multilateral meetings;  share 
emerging  issues of concern; and coordinate technical assistance to  third countries. 351 
Topics  covered  in 2021 included  preparation for the 64th Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 
addressing new psychoactive substances  and synthetic drugs, the impacts of the evolving 
situation in Afghanistan o n drug trafficking, along with  alternative development in  Peru. 
The U.S.  will continue to  utilize this partnership to  deepen  cooperation and collaboration,  
especially  related  to the production and trafficking of synthetic drugs and precursor 
chemicals.  
The Organization of American  States  anti-drug component (OAS/CICAD)  works to  
address the hemisphere’s drug problems by translating global treaty and policy 
frameworks for drug control into practical action at the regional level through mutual 
accountability frameworks, policy debates and dialogues, law enforcement information sharing, and technical assistance programs . As its 
primary benefactor, the  United  States  supports 
CICAD to  address the top drug supply threats  and 
demand  issues affecting the western  hemisphere. 
The United  States  will continue to  support CICAD 
efforts to  reduce the  trafficking  of precursor 
chemicals,  maritime  drug trafficking, and the 
production and smuggling of drugs throughout the region. The United S tates will  also continue to 
improve its  assessments  of returns on investments  
in these efforts. 
Finally,  
our partners Australia,  Canada,  New  
Zealand,  and the  United  Kingdom, colloquially 
named  the “Five Eyes”,  are critical  to worldwide 
law enforcement and intelligence sharing, and to  
our understanding of the  drug threat globally. They  face  many  of the same  challenges  as 
the United  States,  including  international precursor shipments  and the growing influence 
of Mexican  drug trafficking organizations. Representatives  of our Five  Eye partners 
attend  monthly classified  meetings,  hosted by ONDCP,  with the full spectrum of 
interagency  partners to  share  critical  information, trends, and leads.  Our Five  Eye 
partners help facilitate law  enforcement cooperation and information sharing. They  also 
provide ships and aircraft  to our interdiction  missions  in several  critical  locations  around 
the globe. We will  continue to expand these  relationships to  better  understand drug 
trafficking  not just  in our countries,  but around the world. 
C. Encourage international organizations to develop tools and offer capacity building to help countries address pressing threats related to the manufacturing and trafficking of illicit drugs, including emerging synthetic drugs.  (Agencies involved: 
DHS/CBP; DEA; DOJ; DOS; Treasury; USPIS) 
International organizations offer opportunities to  mobilize countries globally to  share  
information about e merging trends, develop best practices, and strengthen capacity to The abundant supply of illicit 
substances is costing too many 
American lives and causing far 
too much damage to vulnerable 
communities in the United 
States and around the world. 
Global drug trafficking sustains 
a vast domestic and 
international criminal 
ecosystem that enables 
corruption and destabilizes 
partner nations abroad.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  96 address the broad range of issues associated with the illicit global drug market.  These 
efforts help countries around the world develop the skills and tools necessary to take 
measures indep endently and collectively to combat the illicit drug trade and improve 
global health and stability.  Many organizations also offer tools that help monitor global 
trends, improve cross -border collaboration, and offer guidance and best practices to 
improve governments capacities to address drug challenges.  For example, UNODC's 
Global SMART improves the capacity of targeted countries to generate, manage, and use information on illicit synthetic drugs through early warning advisories; the International Narcotics  Control Board's Pre -Export Notification (PEN) Online tool helps track the 
global movement of chemicals used in the manufacture of substances of interest; the Precursor Incident Communication System (PICS) and International Operations on NPS Incident Commu nication System (IONICS) facilitate information sharing to support law 
enforcement investigations and collaboration; and the UN Toolkit on Synthetic Drugs offers countries a suite of programmatic and policy solutions to strengthen their national response t o emerging threats.  The United States should continue leveraging these and 
other tools offered by international and regional organizations to mobilize a global response to drug challenges.  
Principle 4: Protect individuals and the environment abroad 
from criminal exploitation by those associated with drug 
production and trafficking.  
The cultivation  and manufacture of illicit  substances  abroad produces  tremendous  collateral  
damage to the environment. However, the full scope  of damaging activities  carried  out by TCOs  
engaged in  drug trafficking  also includes  illicit  crop cultivation  and illegal  mining  which  result  in 
deforestation and pollution of watersheds  and other sensitive habitats.  Activities  related  to illegal  
drug production in  the Western  Hemisphere  have disproportionately detrimental  effects  on 
vulnerable  populations  ill equipped to  confront  these activities  on their  own.  
A. Work with Western Hemisphere partners to address the criminal destruction of 
natural resources due to illicit drug production.  (Agencies Involved: DOS; EPA; 
USAID)  
In Colombia, large  areas  of forest  are clear  cut to make  room  for coca  cultivation  and 
clandestine runways  to support  aerial  trafficking  operations. Deforestation  leaves  
communities  more  vulnerable  to erosion and landslides  that displac e populations. In 
Mexico,  environmental  pollution by the illicit  synthetic drug trade is  well  documented;  
the high acidity  of drug wastewater  and harsh  chemicals  damage  sensitive environments. 
The United  States  must  engage  with  partner  nations  in the Western  Hemisphere  to 
prioritize  the protection of their  natural  resources  from  environmentally  damaging 
activities  carried  out by TCOs  engaged in  illicit  drug manufacture  and trafficking.  
Engagements  must  emphasize the  range  of approaches  to address  environmental  
destruction  including  investigations , prosecutions, and reclamation  efforts.  
The abundant  supply of illicit  substances  is costing  too many  American  lives  and causing  far too 
much  damage  to vulnerable communities  in the United  States  and around the  world. Global  drug 
trafficking  sustains  a vast domestic and international  criminal  ecosystem  that enables  corruption 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  97 and destabilizes  partner  nations  abroad. These  illicit  substances  and corresponding criminality  
contribute  to a crisis  with  considerable national  security,  public  safety  and public  health  
implications  in the United  States,  the western  hemisphere,  and beyond. W e recognize  the full 
scope  of damaging  activities  related  to illicit  drug trafficking includes  disproportionately 
detrimental  effects  on vulnerable  and underrepresented populations  at home  and abroad, and our 
understanding of the  illicit  industry’s  negative environmental  effects  continues  to grow. 
We must  leverage the  full capabilities  of the  U.S.  Government  and our international  partners  to 
reduce  the global  supply of illicit  substances  to reduce  the availability  of these substances  in the 
United  States.  The complexity  and diffusion of illicit  drug supply chains,  crimi nal drug 
trafficking  organizations, and their  networks  of facilitators  demands  a renewed  commitment  by 
agencies  to identify  opportunities  to engaged  with  nations  and organization world-wide  to 
objectively  characterize the  issues and identify holistic solutions  that increase the  risk and cost  of 
illicit  activity  and incentivize and enhance  access  to licit alternatives.  This  requires  identifying 
shared responsibilities  between  nations  and working with  international  partners  to effectively  
counter transnational  illicit  supply chains. The  United  States  will set an example as a leader  in 
world efforts  to counter these criminal  organizations  and their  facilitators  and reduce  the harms  
associated  with  illicit  drugs.  
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  98 Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Arrest and incarceration  of persons with  substance use  disorder (SUD)  has had severe 
consequences for individuals,  their  families  and communities,  society,  and taxpayers.  Further, 
attaching  criminal  penalties  to substance use  alone has contributed to  lost lives,  hope and 
opportunity. Untreated  substance use  disorder is  overrepresented in the prison population. It is 
estimated  that 65 percent  of persons incarcerated  have  an active SUD.352 The impact begins at  
arrest and continues  through incarceration , after  release , and during reentry to communit ies. 
Arrest and incarceration  for crimes  related  to substance use  and possession  disproportionately 
impact Black,  Indigenous and People of Color (BIPOC) and other historically marginalized  
communities.  In fact,  Black  persons are nearly five times  more likely  to be incarcerated  for drug 
possession  than  White persons.353  
The arrest and incarceration  of people for possession of drugs for personal use – and the high 
number of people arrested and incarcerated for other reasons while also experiencing substance 
use disorders - has not only led  to significant harms in  BIPOC and other historically 
marginalized communities,  but it increases  risks of overdose. Upon release,  incarcerated  
individuals are at a meaningfully elevated risk to die from an overdose than  the general 
population.354,355 It is clear  that the criminal  justice system , while improving public safety, mu st 
also play  an important role in  ensuring that  people with in its custody or supervision and upon 
reentry who  use drugs do not overdose and instead  have  access  to the continuum of services  and 
support. Ensuring meaningful rehabilitation and successful reentry advances public health and public safety goals.  
We need  to ensure that those with  SUD who  are involved with  the juvenile and criminal  justice 
systems  receive the  services  and support they  need  while  in jail or prison, under community  
supervision, upon release, and during reentry. Entities along the justice continuum system must  
screen  people for SUD,  offer appropriate treatment,  and provide effective reentry  services  pre- 
and post-release.  We also must  develop  comprehensive,  cross-system  collaborations and services  
to divert people interacting  with  the criminal  justice system  due to drug use  alone from that 
system  without negatively  impacting  public safety  and to link them to appropriate services .  
We must  invest  in programs that provide evidence-based  treatment  and support at  all points in  
the criminal  justice system.  We must  build upon the growing support for this  evidence-based  
approach among the  criminal  justice system  and law  enforcement stakeholders to  rapidly scale 
up these efforts nationwide.
356 
Principle 1: Improve access  to MOUD for incarcerated  and 
reentry  populations  
Medication  for opioid use  disorder (MOUD)  programs in  criminal  justice settings , when 
administered properly by trained professionals, dramatically  reduce mortality  post-release and 
increase the likelihood that an  individual will stay  in treatment, rejoin their communities 
successfully, and reduce their risk of recidivism —all of which enhance individual and 
community public health and public safety outcomes.357,358 Research  has shown that for 
incarcerated  individuals with  OUD,  treatment  with  MOUD corresponded to  a reduction  in the 
risk of death  by 85-percent for drug overdoses in  the month following their  release.359 We also  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  99 know  that people  with  OUD are  up to  50-percent  less likely  to die when  they  are treated  long 
term with  methadone or buprenorphine.360 We must  work to  make  low-threshold access  to 
MOUD throughout  the criminal  justice system  the norm. Evidence has  shown that  these  
medications  when administered properly are  safe,  highly effective,  and save  lives.361 Low -
threshold programs  prioritize providing MOUD quickly and with  minimal  barriers  to eligibility,  
which  expands  access  to more vulnerable  populations  and reduces  overdose  risk. Screening 
individuals  at intake and ensuring individuals  on MOUD are,  at a minimum,  maintained  on their  
medication  is essential.  However, complex  medical  assessment  should not  hinder rapid initiation  
of treatment.  All three Food and Drug Administration  (FDA)  approved medications  (methadone,  
buprenorphine, and naltrexone) should be  made available with  medically  appropriate  dosing. 362 
Although behavioral  interventions  may  also be  beneficial  for people  with  OUD,  providers  should 
not withhold medications  from  people  with  OUD when  behavioral  interventions  are not available 
or when  individuals  decline them,  but will accept  MOUD.  Evidence has  shown that  MOUD 
when  administered  properly by trained  professionals  decreases  the risk of opioid-related  
overdose  and death, decreases  illicit  opioid use,  and likewise improves  health  outcomes.  They  
are also more  effective in  reducing illicit  opioid use  and retaining  individua ls in treatment  than  
behavioral  interventions  and treatments  alone .363 
Although MOUD when administered properly by trained professionals has  a strong evidence -
base and saves  lives,  as of August  2021, only about  12 percent  (602 out  of 5,000) of correctional  
facilities  offer any form  of MOUD.364 Few  facilities  maintain  treatment  for individuals  receiving  
MOUD at  arrest  and even  fewer  initiate MOUD for untreated  individuals.365 Regulations  
surrounding the  provision of methadone  and buprenorphine  are one reason  for limited  MOUD 
programs.366 However, The  Practice Guidelines  for the  Administration  of Buprenorphine  for 
Treating  Opioid Use  Disorder, were issued  in April  2021 to assist  in increasing  access  to 
buprenorphine367 and proposed federal  regulations  that will permit  opioid treatment  programs  
(OTPs)  to provide  methadone through mobile components  means  will also assist  expanding 
access  in correctional  facilities  where  there are  barriers  to establishing  an OTP  behind the  wall s. 
The criminal  justice system  is a critical  touchpoint  for people  with  SUD  today. However, we  
envision a  future  where  these individuals  are diverted  from  the criminal  justice system  when 
appropriate and without negatively impacting public safety and do not  lose access  to the 
continuum  of care.  
A. Expand access to MOUD in state and local correctional facilities and community 
corrections.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP, BOP, NIC; HHS/ASPE, N IH) 
As noted previously, very few  jails  and prisons  continue  treatment  with  methadone  or 
buprenorphine  for those  receiving  these medications  prior to  incarceration,  and even  
fewer  initiate OUD treatment  with  these medications.  Jurisdictions  wanting  to continue  or 
initiate OUD treatment  with  medication  may  need  to develop approaches  that are 
customized  for their  facility  and population. Courts  and community  corrections  agencies  
also play  a large role  in determining  the type of treatment  available to individuals  with  
SUD  in the criminal  justice system.368 When appropriate, i ndividuals  should be  allowed  
to continue  MOUD while on pretrial release, probation, or parole,  and court -ordered  
treatment  should not  ban or discourage  the use of MOUD—nor should it  mandate or 
encourage  use of one  medication  over  another. Requiring persons  to change  medications  
or discontinue  MOUD as  a condition of criminal  justice supervision is associated  with  
poor criminal  justice and health  outcomes,  and a  lower  likelihood of participating  in 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  100 substance  use treatment  or MOUD in  the future.369,370,371 Worse, because  physiological  
tolerance to  opioids  declines  during abstinence,  persons  required to  withdraw  
involuntarily  from  methadone or buprenorphine  face  a substantially  increased  risk of 
overdose  and death  if they use opioids  even  once.372,373 Best  practices  have  been  
published by leading  organizations  including the Substance  Abuse a nd Mental  Health  
Services  Administration  (SAMHSA )374 and the  National  Association  of Drug Court  
Professionals  (NADCP).375,376 NADCP  suggests  that medication  decisions, including  the 
decision  to reduce  or discontinue  a medication,  should be  made  by patients  in 
consultation  with  a legally  authorized and competently  trained  medical  practitioner. As 
such, nonmedically -trained  criminal  justice professionals  should consider medication 
decisions relating  to participants’  psychosocial  needs  made by duly trained  and 
credentialed  clinicians  and supervision officers  in conjunction  with  the individual.377,378 
Additionally, fewer  than  one in 21 youth 17 -years -old and younger have  access  to 
MOUD.379 Juvenile  justice detention  centers  must  also ensure  access  to MOUD and defer 
to trained  medical  professionals  regarding  medical  decisions, such  as the need  for and 
mode  of SUD  treatment.  
It has been  reported that some  judges  direct  participants  to specific  treatment  providers  
and express  a preference  for a  particular  medication.380 However, deference  should be  
given to  the treatment  recommendations  of medical  professionals  when appropriate . 
Communication  and coordination among jails,  prisons, courts, and community  
corrections  regarding treatment  plans  can help ensure  continued  access  to MOUD 
throughout  transitions  within  the correctional  system  and upon release.  As mentioned 
previously, the  recently  issued  guidelines  around buprenorphine  prescribing  and proposed 
regulations  for mobile  methadone  will alleviate some  barriers  to providing MOUD in  
criminal  justice setti ngs. Still,  working groups  and discussions  with  corrections  officials  
should convene  to facilitate peer -learning,  including lessons learned  implementing  and 
funding MOUD in  various  criminal  justice settings.   
In coordination with  ongoing work of the NIDA’s  Justice Community Innovation 
Network  and the  National  Institute of Corrections  (NIC), ONDCP  will survey state and  
local  corrections  systems  to learn  more  about  the MOUD landscape to  better  inform  
policy. ONDCP  will also convene  with  BOP,  NIC, and NIDA correctional  leadership  to 
develop and disseminate best practices for fully adopting MOUD in  correctional  settings.  
  Although roughly 2.3 million persons are incarcerated in prisons annually, roughly 8 to 
10 million persons  cycle through short -term incarceration in jails each year, many of 
whom are experiencing SUD and could benefit from access to MOUD administered 
properly by trained professionals.381 ONDCP  will leverage initiatives,  such  as OJP's 
Comprehensive Opioid, Stimu lant, and Substance Abuse Program (COSSAP),382 to 
expand the  use of MOUD in  jails.  ONDCP also  will work with  OJP to  prioritize  MOUD 
in jails  for grantee  applications  and awards.  
B. Expand funding for SUD treatment in the criminal justice system. (Agencies Involved: DOJ; HHS/ASPE, CMS, SAMHSA)  
Current  federal  Medicaid  law generally prohibit s federal  Medicaid  matching  funds  for 
otherwise  reimbursable  services  for individuals  when  they  are incarcerated,  referred to as 
the Medicaid  Inmate  Exclusion P olicy.
383 Section  5032 of the  SUPPORT  Act created  
demonstration opportunities  for states  to expand services  to beneficiaries  transitioning  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  101 from  incarceration  to the community,  and states  should work with  CMS to  incorporate  
SUD  treatment  best practices  in their  programs.   
The Biden-Harris  Administration  is making  significant  investments  in the SUD  system  
with the potential to expand existing grant programs to provide services  to incarcerated  
individuals , such as the Supplemental Substance Abuse Block Grant, State Opioid 
Response, and the Medication Assisted Treatment -Prescription Drug and Opioid 
Addiction grants. 
Funding MOUD programs  was a barrier found in  a study of medical  staff  and wardens  
providing opioid agonist  treatments  in jails and prisons.384 Many  funding sources  are not 
secure  from  year -to-year,  leading  to uncertainty  about  longer-term  programming. 
ONDCP  will explore  sustainable  opportunities  to fund MOUD in  jails,  where  the largest  
number of people  with  untreated  SUD cycle in  and out  of the  criminal  justice system , and 
ensure its proper administration by trained professionals . Opioid litigation  settlement  
proceeds  will be among the  potential  funding sources  ONDCP  will recommend.   
C. Simplify the regulation of methadone and buprenorphine to create the necessary 
flexibility for jails and prisons to offer MOUD. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; HHS/SAMHSA) 
Regulatory changes  are needed to  offer these services  in jails and prisons  in a safe and 
legal  way.  SAMHSA  should continue its efforts to adopt a more  flexible “take home”  
medication  rules  for people  in jail or prison when appropriate , and make the COVID-19 
pandemic  emergency  regulations  permanent,  including  allowing  for remote prescribing. 
While HHS  released  updated buprenorphine  prescribing guidelines  expanding access  to 
treatment,
385 it is important  to recognize that many  jail providers  serve  both facility - and 
community -based  populations, leading  to issues when  prescribers  have  a patient  limit.  
ONDC P should work to  resolve  this issue.  ONDCP  should also  work with  DEA to  clarify  
the application  of the  “72-hour rule” to providers  in the criminal  justice system  and 
explore  the possibility  of increasing  the time  length  that allows trained practitioners to 
administer MOUD properly in  the criminal  justice setting  when appropriate . The  72-hour 
rule, or three -day rule,  allows  practitioners  to administer  methadone  (or other Schedule II 
medication  approved for the treatment  of OUD)  for a  72-hour period while arranging 
referral  to treatment  through an  OTP.386  
Principle 2: Advance  racial equity  in investigation,  arrest,  
and sentencing  for drug  related offenses  
As noted previously, BIPOC and other historically marginal ized communities  have  experienced 
harmful disparate impacts throughout all  aspects  of the  criminal  justice system,  leading  to the 
disruption of families  and communities.  President  Biden  has emphasized  the need  to eliminate 
racial  and other inequities  in the criminal  justice system  while improving public safety and has  
stated  that people  should not  be incarcerated  for substance  use alone  but offered treatment  
instead.387,388  
A. Use data to identify racial inequities and to assist in driving policy changes.  
(Agencies Involved: DOJ/FBI, OJP)  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  102 The Federal  Bureau of Investigation  (FBI)  Uniform  Crime  Reporting (UCR) program  
data,  and many  other  federal  datasets,  do not  disaggregate  data reporting for individuals  
of Latin o heritage individua ls by race.389 Because they  are not identified  as a distinct  
ethnic group, disparities  cannot  be examined.  The FBI should ensure  that its criminal  
justice data captures  racial  and ethnic data  for the  broadest  number of groups  practicable.  
Although it  is well -known that  there  are racial  disparities  in the criminal  justice system,  it 
is vital  to follow  the data  to identify  where  disparities  exist  to evaluate and develop  
appropriate  data -driven policy proposals.  
B. Engage prosecutors and judges to ensure equitable treatment for individuals 
involved in the criminal justice system. Expand training for staff in drug court 
programs to reduce the role of personal biases in screening out eligible nonviolent 
drug court program candidates. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/ OJP, BOP)   
Evidence  exists  to suggest  that standardized  criminal  justice policies  that improve  access  
to drug treatment  may  reduce  some  of the  disparities  between  Black  and W hite referrals  
to treatment.390 Expanding training  for staff  in drug court  programs will  work towards  
creating  a more  standardized  process  for screening  drug court  candidates  and prevent  
personal  biases  from  impacting  the decision -making  process. A  survey of 600 courts  
found that  less than  4 percent  of the arrestee population at  risk of SUD entered  treatment. 
391 This  is likely  a reflection  of the  fact that many  jurisdictions  rely on the  discretion  of 
prosecutors, defense  attorneys,  and judges  to make drug court  referrals  on a  case-by- case 
basis.  To create a more  equitable process,  we support  the implementation  of a universal,  
systematic screening process  of arrestees which  would work to  prevent  biases  from  
impacting  treatment  referral  decisions. Universal  screening of persons entering he 
criminal justice should wo rk to quickly  process  every defendant  for eligibility  and be  
integrated  into regular case  processing.392   
C. Allow courts to exercise sound judicial discretion and independence.  (Agency 
Involved: DOJ)  
Mandatory minimum  sentencing  allows  no room  for courts  to exercise sound judicial  
discretion  and independence,  and thus judges  are required to  impose  punishments  that 
they may not otherwise given the individualized facts and circumstances of each case. These sentences  are commonly triggered  by the  weigh t of the drug, with  the weight  
corresponding to  specific  sentences.  If weight  and monetary thresholds  were  raised, 
fewer  individuals  would be  subjected  to mandatory minimum  sentences.
393 In 2009, 
Rhode  Island eliminated  mandatory  minimum  sentences  and allowed  courts  to exercise 
judicial  independence for nonviolent  drug offenses. While the prison population 
decreased,  its violent  crime rate  decreased  as well.394,395 These long and harsh sentences  
disproportionately affect  poor people , BIPOC, and other historically marginalized 
groups .396 In consultation and collaboration with DOJ,  ONDCP will  identify 
opportunities  to amend federal statutes that impose mandatory minimum sentences for 
drug-related offenses —as warranted and where appropriate without negativ ely impacting 
public safety —allowing  courts  to exercise  sound judicial  discretion  and independence 
based upon the mitigating and aggravating factors in each case.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  103 Principle 3: Promote Alternatives to Incarceration  
Those committing  drug-related  offenses are  serving longer sentences than before,397 even  as 
research  shows that more  time in prison does  not reduce drug use  or drug arrests.398 While we  
support the work in  states  that are updating  their  criminal  laws  as they  relate to  substance use  and 
possession,  programs that divert non-violent individuals  from the  criminal  justice system  and 
juvenile justice system  without negatively impacting public safety and offer them  services  to 
address their  SUD must  be supported when appropriate. Many  of th ese programs can  be found 
on the Annals of Research  and Knowledge (ARK), an  ONDCP -funded online, user -friendly 
database describing  evidence-based  and promising programs based  on the risk  level  and needs of 
an individual at  each  stage of interaction  with the criminal  justice system.399  
An example of a program in  which  alternatives  to incarceration  are promoted is  occurring in  
Richmond County (Staten  Island) in  New York led  by their  District  Attorney (DA)  Michael  
McMahon. DA McMahon  has witnessed  the impact  of addiction  in his county and worked with  
the New York Police Department  (NYPD)  and the court system  to create the Heroin Overdose 
Prevention & Education  (HOPE)  program where individuals  who  would be arrested  for crimes  
related  to their  substance use  are offered the opportunity to meaningfully engage in  social  and 
medical  services  (peer support, harm reduction,  SUD treatment),  prior to  the processing of the 
arrest.  If the individual does  engage, their arrest is  not processed. Since program inception,  
approximately  94-percent of the  individuals who  complete an  assessment  to participate in  the 
program meaningfully engage in  services  and have their  cases  withdrawn and these participants  
are considerably  less likely  to be rearrested.400 
A. Work with federal, state, and local partners to support pre-arrest diversion 
programs for non-violent individuals when appropriate and without negatively impacting public safety. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/OJP, BOP; HHS/ASPE, SAMHSA)  
Diversion programs work to  target  the 
underlying problems that  lead  to crime and  
effective diversion programs can  enhance 
long-term public safety  and reduce recidivism 
while saving tax -payer  dollars.
401,402 As 
previously discussed,  law enforcement 
officers often encounter  individuals with  SUD 
in their  daily  work, or in  response to  calls  for 
assistance.  When  no arrest is  made,  officers 
are increasingly  facilitating  pre-arrest 
diversion or deflection  into available 
programs. Such  pre-arrest diversion is a harm  
reduction approach. A number of states  have 
worked to  implement  pre-booking jail  
diversion programs as  a result of the opioid 
epidemic.  Many  jurisdictions  describe the 
importance of shifting police culture towards 
community  policing and community  
collaboration  to quickly  identify  people who  
are high-risk  and would particularly  benefit Another resource to assist drug 
courts to divert individuals to 
MOUD services is available in the 
NDCI MOUD Toolkit. This toolkit 
offers practical resources to help 
drug courts implement MOUD in 
accordance with scientific 
knowledge, drug court best 
practices, and emerging legal 
precedent. This tool kit includes 
three model memoranda of 
understanding, two letter templates, 
and an informational brochure for 
drug court participants and their 
loved ones. Additional information 
is available here: 
https://www.ndci.org/resource/traini
ng/medication -assisted -
treatment/moud -toolkit  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  104 from  diversion. 403 ONDCP will  work to  enhance  their  efforts  and share  the lessons 
learned  and best  practices.  DOJ  and HHS  should also  work to  identify opportunities  to 
expand funding for implementing,  sustaining, and evaluating  appropriate  criteria for pre-
arrest  diversion programs  that allow  for a  fact-specific  evaluation  of the  characteristics  of 
non-violent offenders and the offense  and would not  negatively  impact  public  safety.   
B. Expand screening to divert non -violent individuals to the appropriate community-
based services at the point of arrest, arraignment, and sentencing when appropriate 
and without negatively impacting public safety. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP, OJP)  
The National  Drug Court  Institute  (NDCI) identifies,  trains, coaches,  and connects  drug 
court  programs with  addiction  specialty  physicians,  physician assistants,  and nurse  
practi tioners. This  allows  expanded relationships  with  medical  providers  to assist  in 
developing treatment  protocols  and individualized  treatment  plans.  Early  in 2022, NDCI, 
in partnership with  the American  Society  of Addiction  Medicine (ASAM),  will also pilot  
a three -day virtual  training  series  to train physicians, physician assistants,  and nurse s in 
the system.  Agencies n eed to continue  such  efforts.  
Federal  grant -making agencies,  such  as HHS  and DOJ,  support  drug court  programs by 
including language  in their  awards  ensuring participants  cannot  be compelled  to cease use  
of MOUD when administered properly by trained professionals . Agencies must ensure 
that t his language  is maintained  in current and future grant awards , and compliance with 
it should be  monitored  by the grant -making  agencies.  
C. Assess impact on those with SUDs on Drug Delivery Resulting in Death Charge under state laws.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ; HHS; ONDCP)  
Drug traffickers  and violent  drug dealers  who sell drugs  for profit  deserve  punishment  for 
their crimes,  especially  when  their products  result  in a fatal  overdose. It  is important  that 
laws designed to  punish drug traffickers  harshly are  not inadvertently  applied  to those  
with SUD  who  are not significant  drug traffickers, but  essentially  are purchasing drugs  
with another user. Individual  characteristics and the circumstances  surrounding the 
commission of the offense matter  in terms of determining the appropriate and 
proportional  penalty . DOJ  and HHS  should assess how  states  are using these laws  and 
provide  recommendations  to the Attorney General,  Secretary  of HHS  and Director  of 
ONDCP  with regard to necessary changes .  
Principle 4: Improve  reentry —Expand  and remove barriers  
to support  services   
Individuals  reentering the  community  benefit  from  support  services  to reintegrate them  into 
society  and connect  them  to stabilizing social  services.404 Individuals  need  assistance with 
gainful  employment, housing and educational  opportunities, and connection to benefit s and 
health  care coverage.405 Individuals  with  SUD  face additional  challenges,  from  heightened risk  
of overdose  post -release to  connecting with  community  providers  for treatment.406,407,408 
Planning for release and reentry  is critical  and should involve  the individual  and relevant  
community  partners, and begin  at intake and  continue  throughout  the individual’s  
incarceration.409 Warm  hand -offs  to providers  also increase the likelihood of engagement  in 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  105 services  and improves  treatment  outcomes,  particularly  when  there is  an established  relationship  
with the provider.410,411 
A. Ensure evidence-based in reentry support, improving linkages to the community 
and reentry and recovery outcomes.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/BOP, OJP; DOL; 
HHS/ASPE, CMS, SAMHSA)  
Release and reentry are critical  times for ensuring a  safe and stable transition  into the 
community  and providing a  linkage  to treatment.  Individuals  should leave the  facility  
with state- issued  identification,  Medicaid  (if applicable),  and other  benefits.  Individuals  
should also  be provided with  naloxone  and naloxone  training  upon release.  Individuals  on 
MOUD should be  provided with  a bridge  prescription or take-home  medication,  along  
with an appointment  with  a community  provider and a  warm  handoff to the provider. 
Providing these linkages  will improve  outcomes  and save  lives.  ONDCP  should work  
with federal  partners  at DOJ  and HHS  to ensure  that federal  funding opportunities  
support  and promote  community  reentry.  
B. Eliminate collateral con sequences that do not serve to protect the public.  (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ/BOP, OJP)  
Drug-related  criminal  convictions  can carry  unique  lifelong  penalties  that go above  and 
beyond one’s  sentence,  including  an indelible  electronic record. Known  as collateral  
consequences  of conviction, these penalties  are common  in both state and federal  law and 
can be lifelong. Examples  include bans  on access  to public  housing, public  assistance,  
ineligibility  to vote,  serve  on a jury, temporary or permanent  ineligibility  for f ederal  
student  aid, ineligibility  for employment  in health  care facilities  or within  a state 
government, or ineligibility  to obtain a  professional  license— even  in a field  in which  one 
had long practiced  as a licensed  professional.  
Collateral  consequences  severely  limit  one’s  ability  to have  a successful reentry  process  
and carry lifelong penalties.  It is “no wonder, then, that  approximately  60-percent  of 
formerly incarcerated  individuals  remain  unemployed one  year  after incarceration .”412 
While collateral  consequences  are narrowly tailored and serve  a necessary  public  
function in  some  cases,  such  as by forbidding prohibiting employment  of individuals  
convicted  of Medicaid  fraud at  health  care  facilities  receiving  federal  funding, in  other  
cases,  they  serve  principally to  impede  or prevent  successful reintegration  and recovery. 
Moreover, the  United  States  Commission  on Civil  Rights  has noted that  the impact  of 
collateral  consequences  of conviction  extends  beyond the  individual  to the family  and 
community  and that,  while  certain  collateral  consequences  of conviction  serve  to 
safeguard the  public, others  are unrelated  to the crime for which  a person was  convicted 
and do not  serve  a public  safety  purpose.413  
Moreover, the  Commission noted that both  the public  and the  judiciary lack  awareness  of 
collateral  consequences  of conviction, undermining any hypothesized deterrent  effect.  
Consequently, the  Commission recommended  that collateral  consequences  of conviction 
only be  imposed  when  they serve  to protect  the public,  noting that  when  such  a function 
is absent  such  provisions  actually  undermine  public  safety  by hindering successful  
community  reintegration.414 We must  continue  to advance such  efforts.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  106 Data Systems  and Research  
The Biden-Harris  Administration  is committed  to employing  a multi -faceted  and evidence-based  
approach to  policy -making  as directed in the Presidential Memorandum on scientific integrity 
and evidence-based policymaking . 415 This  is particularly  significant  in the area of drug  policy  
where  the ultimate  impact  is typically  measured  in American  lives.  Timely  and accurate data  are 
essential  to grasp the  extent  and evolving nature  of the  drug problem, guide  policy, assess the  
effectiveness  of our nation’s  efforts, and continually improve  these efforts  over time.  Data 
systems  and research  to generate this  information  must  be maintained,  enhanced,  and 
supplemented  so drug control  practitioners,  researchers,  and policy -makers  are continually 
informed by the  most  up to  date and accurate information, while also protecting privacy and 
confidentiality . Further, when  well  communicated,  such  data  can help  inform  the American  
public  as to the types  of policies  and programs  most  likely  to successfully  address  substance  use 
challenges  in their  own  communities.  
Development  of effective drug policy requires  timely  and rigorous  data covering the  full range  of 
trends  and activities:  consumption patterns  and drug use  consequences, such  as drug morbidity 
and mortality;  prevention, harm  reduction,  treatment,  and recovery;  drug production,  
transportation and distribution  by drug trafficking organizations;  economic  consequences  of 
substance  use; eradication  and interdiction  operations, and related  investigations  and 
prosecutions, by law  enforcement  and national  security  organizations  at home  and abroad. 
Further, such  data must  be sufficiently  robust  to inform  questions  about  health  disparities  in 
substance  use and service  delivery,  as well  as provide  insights  as to how  to build health  equity  
related  to the alleviation  of substance  use challenges.  This  is a tremendous  undertaking that  
requires  data  collection  by diverse  stakeholders,  robust  information systems  and analytical  
capabilities  to adapt  as the situation  evolves.   
Curating a  knowledge  base  of various  policy  and intervention tools  is another  important  aspect  of 
a science-ce ntered  modus. This  too requires  reliable data along with  sound analytical  techniques  
that ensures  that policy and program  decisions  are grounded in  science.  By building an 
awareness  of drug-related  issues and creating  a compendium  of evidence-based  solutions, policy  
makers  and practitioners  can select  proven  policies  and interventions  that are appropriate  for 
contexts  and populations  to which  they  are applied.  
Two decades  ago, ONDCP  commissioned  the National  Research  Council  (NRC) to  review  data  
sources  and research  needs  to inform  drug  policy.10 Some  of the  NRC  report  findings  remain  
relevant  today:  
“Overall  the committee finds  that the existing  drug use  monitoring systems  and 
programs  of research  are useful  for some  important  purpose s, yet they  are strikingly  
inadequate  to support  the full range  of policy decisions  that the nation must  make.  The 
central  problem  is a woeful  lack of  investment  in programs  of data collection  and 
empirical  research…”.416 
 
10At that time,  ONDCP  had a budget  line item for policy  research  which  enabled  the commissioning  of such a study.  
The policy research  budget  line was last authorized in FY 2011 for approximately  $1.3 million.   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  107 Considering the  costs  of drug use  to our society,  which  have  vastly  increased  due to the opioid 
epidemic over the past decade,  our data  systems  have not kept up and lack the timeliness,  scope  
and precision  required  for the  most  impactful  national  response. As  we assess the  data  and 
research  landscape to  address  the Administration’s  commitment  to implementing  evidence-based  
drug policy, we  have  much  more  work to  do to  close information and knowledge  gaps. This  
chapter  focuses  on three  themes:  strengthening existing  data systems,  establishing  new  data 
systems  and analytical  methods  to fill gaps,  and enhancing the utility  of drug data  for 
policymakers, program  developers  and administrators,  practitioners,  and researchers. It  
concludes  with  recommendations  for sustaining data  systems  and research  to inform  drug control  
policy.  
Principle 1: Strengthen  existing data systems  
Data on drug use  and its  correlates  typically  consist  of primary data  collected  through 
mechanisms  such  as the federally -funded periodic  natio nal surveys, administrative data that  
contain  drug-relevant  information collected  by government  agencies  in the course  of performing 
their respective missions;  and synthesized  data,  where  information from  multiple sources  are 
compiled  and analyzed  together  to answer  specific research  or policy questions. These  data form  
the foundation of what  we know  about  trends, activities,  and outcomes  and how  we know  it. 
They also  determine  the limitations  of our quantitative knowledge  and understanding. Data also  
allow  us to measure  how  patterns  and consequences  change  over time.  Hence,  they are critical  
indicators  of the  extent  to which  policies  may or may  not be making progress  on their  goals. The  
Strategy’s  Performance Review System (PRS) report —with  its own  specific requirements —
utilizes  specific measures  to track  progress, a nd these are  subject  to the same challenges  in data 
availability,  quality, and timeliness  as outlined in  this chapter. In addition,  there  is a statutory  
requirement  for a Data Plan,11 the development  of which  is addressed separately (see Appendix 
A). 
We envision a future  where  drug use  behavior and its  consequences, including  overdoses, drug 
arrests,  drug-related  communicable diseases,  drugged driving and workplace  drug use,  and the  
availability  and use  of prevention, treatment,  harm  reduction  and recovery support  services  are 
tracked  in real time or as near  to real time as possible , while protecting individual liberty and 
privacy. Only  in this way  can we be able to  continually  inform  an addiction  management  
infrastructure  that is transparent,  accountable and responsive  in making  the important  changes  
needed  to save  lives.  During the  COVID-19 pandemic  several  organizations  demonstrated  that 
with the proper policies  and resources, national,  and even  global,  data on the numbers  and rates  
of infections, deaths,  and vaccinations  could  be collected,  analyzed,  and shared  in near  real time 
while safeguarding personal  information. The same approach can  be applied  to monitoring, 
reporting on, and addressing drug use  and its consequences  by implementing  policies  that 
improve  the timeliness  and completeness  of data such  as making drug overdose  a reportable  
condition.  
Additionally, we  envision a future  that more  fully exploits  the data  we currently  collect.  In 
particular,  the intelligence community  and law enforcement  at the federal,  state and local  levels  
collect  volumes  of data  and, while  these data are  gathered for specific  purposes, when  combined  
they can illuminate criminal  networks  and support  targeted  interdictions  and investigations  to 
 
11 21 U.S.C. § 1705(c)(1)(M),  National Drug Control Strategy  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  108 disrupt  and dismantle drug trafficking  networks. Mechanisms  for information sharing across  the 
intelligence community  and law enforcement  is necessary  along with  resources  devoted  to 
aggregating and communicating  these data  in real time.  When  appropriate, actionable 
intelligence should also  be shared with  public  health  agencies.  Together,  these will  help reduce  
the availability  of illicit  drugs  and enable  health  care practitioners  and public  safety  personnel  to 
stay ahead  of potential  drug overdose  outbreaks. 
A. Identify and address shortcomings in existing data systems. (Agencies Involved: 
DOT/NHTSA; HHS/ASPE, SAMHSA, NIH, CDC, FDA; DOJ/DEA, OJP; OMB/OIRA; OSTP)  
Primary  data collected  by federal  surveys  provide  a window  into the prevalence of drug 
use and associated  behaviors, and lend  themselves  to extensive analysis  to address  
specific policy  questions, such  as how  many  persons  use specific drugs, how  many  need  
treatment,  how  similar  or different  are drug use  patterns  for racial  or ethnic  sub-groups, 
rural  or urban populations, parolees  and probationers, older adults, and other  
demographic  sub-populations. The  National  Survey  on Drug  Use and Health  (NSDUH)  
provides  nationally  representative data  on much  of this  information on persons  living  in 
households.
417 The school -based  Monitoring  the Future  study and, to  a more  limited  
extent,  the Youth Risk  Behavior  Survey , measure  prevalence among youth who  are 
attending  school.  
Other  surveys  include  the new  Drug  Abuse  Warning Network  (DAWN),  reconstituted in  
2018 and anticipated  to yield  its first full-year, nationally  representative data on drug-
involved admissions  to U.S.  emergency  departments  for calendar  year  2020. Prisoner  and 
jail inmate surveys  are conducted by the  Bureau of Justice Statistics,  although less  
frequently, with  the most  recent  prison inmate survey conducted in  2016.418 Besides  
primary data  from  individual  respondents,  facilities  also are surveyed. For  example,  the 
National  Survey  of Substance  Abuse  Treatment  Servi ces (N-SSATS)  collects  data  from  
substance  abuse  treatment  facilities  in the United  States  on facility  location,  scope,  and 
characteristics.   
Many  nationally  representative household and school  surveys  lack  coverage  for 
populations  at high risk  of drug use  that are outside  the realm  of their survey universe  – 
such as youth who  have  quit school, people  experiencing homelessness,  sex workers, or 
arrestees.  These subgroups  are generally  smaller,  more  hidden, and harder to access,  and 
therefore  would require  more  resources  and novel  approaches  to data collection. One  
limitation  of many  drug surveys  is that they  rely on self -report  without  the resources  to 
obtain  additional  corroborating information. Because behaviors  associated  with  drug  use 
are illicit,  self-reporting can  result  in under-reporting of use.  Ideally  self-reporting should 
be complemented  by corroborating data  sources, such  as measurements  relying on 
biological  samples,  when  these are  feasible and can  detect  use during the  period of t ime 
targeted  by the  survey (e.g., past  year,  past month, past  week). Thus  far, the prohibitive  
cost and logistical  issues posed by collecting  such  specimens  has limited  their  routine  
use. Maintaining  existing  primary data  collection  systems  is a continuing endeavor in  the 
face of limited  or shrinking resources. The  discontinuation of the  Arrestee  Drug Abuse  
Monitoring (ADAM)  program  and DAWN,  followed by the  recent  resurrection of the  
latter  are examples  of the  disruptions that  can plague  previously established  data  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  109 collection  systems.  In the long run, it is necessary  to retain  and improve existing  data  
resources by ensuring that they  are adequately  funded and appropriately staffed.  
Administrative data, while  not necessarily  tailored  to drug information needs, are utilized  
as indicators to  inform and monitor drug policy.  One  example is  the use of death  
certificate data;  while such  information is  collected  for many  health -related  purposes, 
death  certificate data can provide insight into substance use  related  overdose deaths  and 
patterns  among such  deaths. Such  administrative data  are repurposed to  extract  
information on patterns and consequences pertaining  to drugs. Many  of our existing  data 
sources originate from administrative records (see box below). 
Administrative data  are rich but tend  to be narrowly focused on the  collecting  agency’s 
mission  and drug information is limited  to their  existing  coding structures.  For example,  
death  certificate data use  the International Classification  of Diseases  (ICD) standard 
developed by the World Health  Organization to  code all  causes  of death  and includes  a 
narrow range of codes  specific to  causes  of death  involving drugs. The need  for more  
detail  on specific drugs in  death  data will  need  to rely on additional  information obtained 
from medical  examiner  or coroner (ME/C)  reports. ME/C  reports are  a separate process 
Major Drug  Data  Sets Originating  from  Administrative  Sources:  
Treatment Episode Data Set  (TEDS) from reporting by treatment facilities receiving public funds to their 
single State agency (SSA), compiled by SAMHSA into a national dataset to provide characteristics of 
admissions to and discharges from substance abuse treatment.  
Death certificat e data from States compiled and coded by the National Center for Health Statistics 
(NCHS), made available from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Wide -ranging 
Online Data for Epidemiologic Research (WONDER) database for data on drug deaths and the 
involvement of specific drugs.  
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) from records of emergency department admissions and 
inpatient hospital stays from participating States compiled by the Agency for Healthcare Quality and 
Research (AHRQ) t o provide data on drug overdoses and neonatal abstinence syndrome.  
National Forensic Laboratory Information System  (NFLIS) from reporting by local, State, and Federal 
forensic laboratories to the Drug Enforcement Agency on drugs identified in seizure sampl es. 
National Seizure System  (NSS) from reporting by law enforcement agencies to the El Paso Intelligence 
Center (EPIC) on drug seizures.  
OCDETF Management Information Systems (MIS) from drug seizure activity reported by law 
enforcement agencies working OCDETF investigations, cases, and initiatives.  
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) from reporting by law enforcement agencies to the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) on crime data.  
Consolidated Counterdrug Database  (CCDB) from U.S. agencies and foreign partners  involved in 
transit zone cocaine interdiction and trafficking events to a curated interagency database on cocaine.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  110 in death  investigation,  and improving their  integration  with  death  certificate information 
is currently undergoing development.  In addition, technological solutions are  also an 
option, for example,  using computer code  to review  the literal  text419 in death  certificates  
for specific mention  of drugs like fentanyl or methamphetamine that  do not have  their  
own ICD codes. Additionally,  the Treatment  Episode Data  Set (TEDS)  collects  data  on 
specialty  SUD treatment  admissions,  transfers, and discharges,  including  diagnoses, 
demographic information, and type  of care received.  These data  are reported to  states  by 
publicly  funded SUD  treatment  providers, compiled  by states  and, in  turn, reported to  the 
Substance Abuse and Mental  Health  Services  Administratio n (SAMHSA ). 
In addition  to the f ederally  funded data  sources noted above, there are  underutilized or 
still developing data systems that need  to be mined  for drug content. For  example,  the 
National Emergency Medical  Services  Information System  (NEMSIS)420 can be 
harnessed for drug overdose data  (see Inset box), and the Fatality Analysis  Reporting  
System  (FARS)421 can provide data on drug involvement in  fatal  traffic crashes.  The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Web-based Injury Statistics  Query  
and Reporting  System  (WISQARS)422 contains fatal  and non-fatal injury data.  In 
addition, the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System -Cooperative Adverse Drug  
Event  Surveillance Project  (NEISS-CADES) by the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission and CDC, began to include the involvement of drugs or alcohol in its 
tracking of injuries and adverse drug events.423 The Overdose Map Detection  Program  
(ODMAP),424 currently covering specific areas,  can be used  for tracking  non-fatal 
overdoses in  some  local  areas.  This  is similarly  true for infectious  disease data  sets such  
as the National  HIV Behavioral Surveillance (NHBS)  collected  by CDC  which  
periodically  assesses HIV-related  information from persons who  inject  drugs.  
Some  of these reporting systems  are voluntary and rely  upon the  contributing partners  for 
timely  and accurate reporting. These then  require statistical  adjustments  by the  collecting  
agency  for missing  reports in  order to  yield  data that  are nationally  representative.  Some  Emergency  Medical  Services  Data  in Near- Real  Time  
Nationwide emergency  medical services  (EMS)  reporting, such  as that aggregated  
and maintained  by NHTSA’s  NEMSIS,  have standardized  patient care  reporting 
across more than  11,000 EMS agencies  in 49 US  states,  which  represented 87-percent 
of all EMS activations  nationally  in 2020. EMS data have been  used  as a source of 
near real time drug environment surveillance information. Characteristics  of 911 
caller  complaints,  EMS providers’ impressions,  patients’  primary symptoms,  and 
receipt  of naloxone correlate strongly with  trends in  drug overdose deaths. Data  from 
EMS patient encounters are submitted  electronically  in near  real time,  allowing  for 
rapid surveillance of trends that can be stratified  by characteristics  such  as 
race/ethnicity,  geography, urbanicity, and neighborhood poverty level.  ONDCP  has 
engaged with  NHTSA to  determine how EMS  databases  may  be better  utilized  at 
state and national  levels  in an early  warn ing capacity  to give  public health  and law  
enforcement officials  rapid and current information  regarding changing overdose 
trends. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  111 data systems,  such  as Consolidated  Counterdrug Database (CCDB) and National  Seizure  
System  (NSS),  also have  to deconflict  reports  where  more  than  one enforcement  agency 
is involved in  the same  interdiction  event  or seizure incident.  
To strengthen these systems,  a strong partnership with  the States  or other  parties  that 
collect  and contribute  data is essential.  The federal  government  does  not have  the 
authority to make reporting mandatory for  state, local,  and Tribal governments, but  can 
make reporting a necessary  condition for organizations  receiving  High  Intensity Drug 
Trafficking  Area  (HIDTA)  or other f ederal  funding. Increased use  of in -kind  incentives  
to improve  data quality,  such  as training,  hardware, and software  solutions  to augment  
limited  local  resources, can  be harnessed  to improve  accuracy  and timeliness  of these 
data that  are not under the  full control  of the  federal  agencies  compiling  them.  
Data  synthesis  to inform  specific drug policy  issues relies  upon data  collections,  both  
primary and administrative,  and array more  than  one data  source  to develop  more  
complete answers  to policy questions  in real time.  Triangulating  multiple data  sources  
can mitigate some  of the limitations  found  in any single  data source. Aggregated data 
from multiple sources are not an issue, however, when individual records are linked 
between agencies, an equal ly important consideration is maintaining confidentiality and 
privacy.  
The study commissioned  by ONDCP,  What  America’s  Users Spend on Illicit  Drugs,  
provides  an example  of an  analytical  product  using multiple data  sources.425 Policy -
relevant  estimates  of economic costs  of drug use  to society,  or of chronic  users,  are 
needed  and will  require  periodic  use of multiple data  sources  and tailored  analytical  
methods. Other  less transparent  data  syntheses  generate  annual  estimates  of heroin or  
cocaine production426 based  on a  combination  of crop survey data,  laboratory analyses,  
and other factors. While the methodologies  for these are  usually classified,  the resulting 
estimates  are released  to the public.  
At present, our ability  to conduct  analyt ical studies  is largely  constrained  by data  
availability,  limited  staffing  and access  to new  technology, and the  absence  of a dedicated  
budget  line for drug policy research  and efforts  to fill drug data gaps.  While the  
reconstitution  of the  Data  IWG  will help  guide  the policy  focus  of analytical  studies  by 
data scientists  in the drug agencies,  ONDCP  will need  to take the lead  in research  that 
cuts across  agency  boundaries. In order to  do this,  ONDCP  needs  to revitalize its research  
staff capabilities  and obtain contract  research  resources  so that the agency  can perform  
these analyses  directly,  or design  and supervise  such  studies  when  the research  is 
contracted  out. 
B. Work collaboratively with federal partners.  (Agencies Involved: DOJ/BJS, DEA; 
DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, FDA, NIH, SAMHSA; OMB/OIRA)  
In 2021, ONDCP  re-established the Drug Data Interagency  Working Group (Data  IWG)  
to enhance collaboration in addressing drug policy data needs. The Data IWG meets approximately  quarterly, or as  needed, to  update  other  drug agencies  on planned, 
ongoing, or completed  research  and data  collection  efforts, and, at  each  meeting,  to focus  
on a specific theme or topic  area of policy  research  that need s attention  and c ould benefit  
from  interagency  input. S pecific topics  to address include,  among others, meeting  
statutory  requirement s for the  NDCS,  pursuing measures  of equity  in drug data,  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  112 measurement  of polydrug use,  developing a recovery research  agenda,  and acquiring  data 
on underserved populations. Th e Drug Data IWG will  complement  ongoing ONDCP  
engagement  with  individual  agencies  at the leadership  and staff  levels.   
C. Complement federal data systems with state, local, Tribal, international, and 
commercial sources in rea l time or near real time.  (Agencies Involved: DOS; 
HHS/CDC; OSTP; ONDCP; private sector, Tribal and local government)  
As noted earlier,  many  of the  existing  data  systems  already  rely on reporting from  States.  
Some  States  are more  proactive  than others  in their  data  collection  and reporting systems.  
In these instances,  it is helpful  for analytical  studies  to include additional  data  they  may 
make available.  For example,  Florida,  New  Hampshire,  and Virginia  regularly  update  
their drug mortality  statistics  and routinely include  supplementary  data from  their  
medical  examiners.   
Limited  data  is available at  the local  and Tribal level,  although there are  some  local  data 
collection  efforts. A  rare example of comparable data  collected  at the local  level  are the 
school  district -based  Youth Risk  Behavior  Surveys  (YRBS) conducted every other  year  
in approximately two  dozen participating  school  districts  or counties  and two  Tribal areas  
sites in 2019.427 These local  efforts  use the same standardized  survey questionnaire  
modules  that are applied  to State and national  samples,  providing comparison  points. The  
YRBS  model  can be applied  to other  data  collection  efforts, resources  permitting.  
Private sector  data  also complements  federal  data.  Although commercial  data  are based  
on convenience samples,  their  coverage  is typically  very large and, because  of this,  they  
can provide  useful  insights  into drug use  trends. One  example is  workforce  drug testing  
results  from  Quest  Diagnostics.428 These data  have  to be purchased, but  they  are often  
timelier  than public  data and may  be collected  with  greater  geographic  granularity.  Quest  
data,  for example,  are collected,  monthly  and can  be disaggregated  at the three -digit  ZIP 
code  level . Other  commercial  data sources  (e.g., IQVIA,  Symphony Health)  can also 
provide  data  on dispensing patterns  for opioid prescriptions  with  granular information  on 
drug, strength, and quantities  dispensed. These  data can be used  to provide  insight  into 
dispensing patterns  throughout  the US and can  be used  to calculate estimates  of morphine  
milligram  equivalents . Because  these sources  tend  to be costly  subscription services  with 
data sharing restrictions,  ONDCP  obtains  summarized  dispensed prescription data  from  
CDC  and shares  summarized  Quest  data  with federal  partners. This  type  of summary data 
sharing needs  to be encouraged, particularly  when  government  funds  are used  to purchase  
data from  commercial  sources. 
Research  engagemen t with  the United  Nations  Office  of Drugs  and Crime  (UNODC),  the 
Organization  of American  States  Inter-American  Drug Abuse  Control  Commission 
(CICAD), and the  European Monitoring Centre  on Drugs  and Drug Addiction 
(EMCDDA),  as well  as bilateral  research  agreements  or collaborative efforts  with  
specific countries  also provide  opportunities  to expand or refine  our own  existing  
systems.  Data exchange platforms managed by the International Narcotics Control Board 
(INCB) can identify emerging drug production trends and threats while supporting law enforcement investigations and customs operations.  These collaborative efforts  with  
internati onal partners  need  to be re-invigorated, expanded and maintained.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  113 Harnessing data relationships  with  local,  Tribal , and state partners  can be facilitated  by 
Organizations  that build  relationships  at the state and local  levels , which can  help  
facilitate dat a sharing. For  example,  the Community  Anti -Drug Coalitions  of America 
(CADCA)429 represents  over 5,000 community  coalitions  in the United  States  and in  
some  30 countries. While it  is not a data collection  organization, it has contacts  at the 
community  level  that might  be leveraged  when  local  information is  needed.  Likewise,  the 
National  Association  of State Alcohol  and Drug Abuse  Directors  (NASADAD),430 which  
represents  Single  State Substance Use  Authorities, and whose  mission  is “to foster and 
support  the development  of effective alcohol  and other drug abuse  prevention and 
treatment  programs  throughout  every state,” could also  facilitate collaboration and timely  
information exchange  with  States.  
Along with  frequent  consultation  with  the research  community  through regular  
attendance at  professional  meetings  and conferences, these strategies  are critical  for 
augmenting federal  data systems to  inform  drug policy.  
D. Prioritize data and analytic efforts to support advancing equity for traditionally 
underserved populations.  (Agencies Involved: DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, HRSA, NIH, 
SAMHSA; DOJ/DEA, OJP)  
The Administration  has identified  advancing equity  for underserved populations  as a 
government -wide  priority and has  established  the Equitable  Data  Working Group 
(EDWG)431 of federal  agencies  to address  data relevant  issues.  ONDCP  participates  in 
the EDWG  to ensure  that our drug-specific data collection  and analysis  efforts  are 
aligned  with  efforts  to advance equity.  In the drug arena,  we need  to be able to  identify 
drug use  patterns  and trends  among specific subpopulations  in addition to  the major  age, 
sex, and race  categories.  These data  are in the very early  stages  of development.  
Additionally, we  need  to continue  to monitor treatment  admission  data  and drug-related  
arrests,  convictions, sentences,  and incarceration  rates  for marginalized  groups  to ensure  
equitable access  to care and fair  treatment  under drug laws.  Further, we  need  to monitor 
health  outcomes  to ensure  that we go beyond  identifying  health  disparities  and actually  
implement  policies  and programs  that achieve health  equity.  
Often, data cannot  be disaggregated  in ways  that permit  analysis  of trends  or outcomes  
among marginalized  groups. For  example,  while research  shows  that sexual  minorities  
are at greater  risk for substance  use, datasets  that include gender identity  and/or sexual  
orientation  are limited.  For example,  2015  was the first year  NSDUH collected  sexual  
orientation  information, finding that 39-percent  of persons  aged  18 or older who  
identified  as lesbian,  gay or bisexual  reported illicit  drug use  in the past year  compared  to 
17-percent  of those  who  did not  identify as  such .432 YRBS  also added questi ons on 
sexual  orientation  and found similar  results.433 The LGB  group, however, combines  
heterogeneous  smaller  groups  and may  conceal  different  drug use  patterns  between  
lesbian,  gay, or bisexual  subgroups  that may  require  different  interventions.  These initial  
findings  demonstrate  that there are clear  differences  that warrant  further investigation.   
Major  ethnic  group labels  also can conceal  diversity —for example,  the large  group name 
of “Hispanic” includes  Cuban and Puerto  Rican  persons, and these communities  have  
widely  diverging drug use  prevalence rates.  Few  studies  of such  subgroups  have  been  
conducted;  one important  study by NIDA434 is now  dated  as it was last updated two  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  114 decades  ago. As  the need  to examine subgroups  with  greater  granularity grows, new  data 
collection  strategies  and analytic approaches  will need  to be developed.   
Other  groups  of interest  include  persons  with  disabilities,  older adults, persons  who  live 
in rural  areas,  and persons  adversely  affected  by persistent  poverty or inequality.  At the 
very least,  we need  to inventory already  existing  but underutilized  data sources  for 
information on underserved populations, and  to routinely analyze  drug data  in more  fine-
grained categories  when  feasib le. When  such  data are not available,  federal  data  
collection  agencies  need  to expand demographic  categories  in existing  surveys  and 
administrative data  collection  tools  so that comparable data can be collected  on diverse  
populations. Finally,  when  surveys  and administrative records  do not  furnish adequate  
information on some  underserved subpopulations, alternative methods  for developing this  
information should be  used.  
E. Improve the timeliness of drug data. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; DOT/NHTSA; 
HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA)  
Timeliness  of data  is essential  because drug use  trends, production, and trafficking  
patterns  can shift  quickly in  response  to changes, such  as the introduction of more  
powerful  or less  expensive  products  or new  regulatory, interdiction,  and law  enforcement  
strategies  and shifting financial  incentives  for traffickers.  New drugs  and new  ways  of 
combining them  hit the streets,  existing  drugs  fall in and out  of favor, new  markets  pop 
up and others  fade  away.  As traffickers  seek  to circumvent  the system  or subgroups  of 
people  who  use drugs  modify their  behaviors, it  is critical  that policy makers  are 
equipped with  the most  current  data  possible  to ensure  that policies  remain  relevant  and 
resources  are effectively  deployed.  
Existing  federal  drug data  systems  do not  collect  real-time data.  Nationally  representative 
surveys  take time to  administer  and require  post -collection  data  cleaning,  weighting,  
analysis,  and summary as  well  as clearance before  publication. When  state administrative 
data are  compiled  by the  federal  government, the  task can only  be completed  after the 
slowest  state has  submitted  data.  Moreover, the  overall  quality  of the data may be 
affected  by inconsistencies  in practices  from  state-to-state.  Much  remains  to be done  to 
improve  timeliness  and, in  some  cases,  quality.   
However, there  has been  some  progress, as  seen  in national  mortality  data.  A decade  ago, 
the reporting lag  for final  mortality  data  was two to three  years.  To address  this lag, 
CDC’s  National  Center for Health  Statistics  began implementing  electronic death  
registration  (EDR) systems  in the states  some  20 years  ago. In the long run, as  the EDR  
systems  matured,  they became  the primary driver of improved timeliness,  reducing the 
reporting lag  to about  one year.  While it is possible  to further reduce  the lag, factors  at 
the state and local  levels,  such  as limitations  in resources  available to  conduct  death  
investigations,  are likely  to confound this  effort. Lessons learned  from  this example could 
be applied  to similar  data  systems  that rely on states  or local  governments  to collect  the 
underlying data  to improve  timeliness  and quality.   
Nationally  representative drug data systems need  to be supplemented  with  more  timely  
and complementary  data sources, such  as the limited,  but near  real-time data  available 
from  sources  such  as Quest  and IQVIA.  Additionally, agencies should maximize cross -
agency  sharing of analytical  products  from  commercial  sources  where possible . Finally,  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  115 as ODMAP  coverage  expands, it  will provide  near -real time information for an  
increasing  number of local  jurisdictions.  
Principle 2: Establish  new data systems  and analytical 
methods 
To ensure  data -driven policy, the  Administration  needs  to identify  gaps  in the current  data 
systems  and identify and implement  strategies  for capturing  needed data  in a timely  and cost -
effective manner. This may  involve  adopting new  data collection,  analysis,  and reporting 
methodologies.  It is also critical  that the government  adopt  cutting -edge  analysis  approaches  
utilizing  multiple data  sources  to inform  policy.  As data collection improves, so too will 
computational requirements for analyzing it.  While existing resources l ike the Department of 
Energy’s supercomputing capabilities might be leveraged, assessments are needed to determine 
if current funding and staffing levels are sufficient to implement these new activities.  
A. Identify and recommend promising drug data sources and methods not currently employed. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, FDA, NIH, SAMHSA) 
In consultation  with  the Drug Data IWG  and other data  partners, ONDCP  should re -
invigorate  a systematic and ongoing review  of research  for new  developments  and 
methods  in drug surveillance.  This should include  federal  agencies,  professional  
organizations, international  counterparts, and other public, nonprofit  and private  sector  
drug researchers  and will  require  ongoing effort. Specifically,  ONDCP  recommends  that 
overdoses  be added to  CDC’s  list of notifiable conditions, under the National  Notifiable  
Diseases  Surveillance System  (NDSS)  as a non-infectious  disease.
435 COVID-19 was  
added last  year,  and a  similar  effort  for drug overdose  is needed. The use of electronic 
health  records  (EHR) and recent  enhancements  with  Electronic Laboratory Reporting 
(ELR) that  incorporate  data  improvements —such  as faster  electronic transmission,  
increased  accuracy,  more  complete reports, and improved consistency —will  enable near 
real time monitoring of drug overdoses.  
B. Utilize alternative, novel, and complementary data collection techniques.  (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ/DEA, OJP; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA)  
There  are a number of potential  sources  of drug data that  are not utilized  fully  in the 
United  States.  Some  of these are discussed  in this section  for illustrative purposes. While 
broad implementation  of any of these would require  resources, they  have  the potential  to 
complemen t existing  sources  and bridge  gaps  in our knowledge.  
One of these methods, pilot  tested  by ONDCP,  is the re-testing  of already  collected  
biological  samples  for a  broader array  of drugs. The  Community  Drug  Early Warning 
System  (CDEWS) methodology, which  is a rapid and low-cost  system  for identifying 
emerging  drugs  at the local  level,  has been  used  for studying people  on probation and 
parole, youth involved in the juvenile justice system,  individuals  in treatment,  and people  
served in  emergency  departments  at about  a dozen sites.436 These re -tested  specimens  are 
not labeled  with  personally  identifiable information  (PII) and cannot  be used  to target  
specific individuals.  CDEWS  data  reveal  that these high -risk populations  commonly  used  
multiple drugs  that would not  be detected  using a  traditional  toxicology panel.  Although 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  116 the utility  of this method has been  established,  large-scale  implementation  would require 
broader data  collection  and sustained  support. 
Wastewater -based  epidemiology (WBE)  is a non-invasive and cost-effective way  of 
monitoring drug use  trends in  local  areas.  Utilized  to monitor  trends in  a growing number 
of countries over the past  20 years, it  has yet to  be widely  adopted  in the U.S.  More 
recently,  public health  applications of WBE  have gained prominence because of its  
application  in COVID-19 testing.437 The National  Science Foundation (NSF)  began 
funding WBE through the Coronavirus Aid,  Relief,  and Economic Security (CARES) 
Act,438 and has included  wastewater  testing  to detect  COVID-19 outbreaks early  and 
projects  to validate the technique for this  purpose. The National  Institutes of Health  
(NIH)  and, specifically,  NIDA,  are funding a small  number of WBE  research  grants for 
drug monitoring. The National  Institute of Justice also  recently  funded a WBE research  
grant. 12 While in  the initial  stages,  much  more remains  to be done to  address major  
knowledge gaps in  the United  States.  To expand application  of this  technique,  we can 
learn  from the international  community,  particularly  the experience of the EMCDDA439 
and Sewage Analysis  CORe group Europe (SCORE).440  
For ‘hard-to -reach’ sub -populations such  as people experiencing  homelessness,  street -
level drug dealers,  sex workers, and the chronically  unemployed, rapid  assessment  
ethnography and focus group interviews  can be employed  at the local  level,  and these 
methods can  yield  insights on respondents’ attitudes  and experiences  which  cannot be  
obtained  from structured  sample surveys. This type of qualitative data  can inform the 
selection  and development of group-appropriate quantitative research  methods to  produce 
generalizable results.  Existing  community  connections with  sub-populations should be 
leveraged  to ensure socially  disadvantaged  groups are properly represented  in our efforts 
to understand drug issues in  these communities;  such  efforts are  central  to building health  
equity. Extending  harm  reduction, treatment,  and recovery support services  can help  
establish  and reinforce these connections and enable a more comprehensive knowledge of 
how drugs impact  all Americans.  NIDA should research  and develop  methods of 
collecting  data on high -risk and ‘hard-to -reach’  sub-populations to  better  inform policy  
making. The  Washin gton, DC  Metropolitan Area  Drug Study (DC*MADS) series,  an 
early  NIDA effort to  do this for a local  jurisdiction,441 examined  household and non-
household populations in  the early  1990s. It included  a Homeless  and Transient  
Population Study  and a study of drug use  among women  delivering  livebirths  in DC 
hospitals.  We recommend  that a similar  effort be considered  to inform policies  that affect 
other high-risk  sub-populations that  are difficult to fully engage with  conventional survey 
methods. 
The Administration  will also prioritize continued  research  on drug detection  devices,  
including fentanyl test  strips  (FTS) ,442 for identifying the presence of concealed  
substances  in drug samples.  These can be life-saving when  deployed  by people who  use 
drugs. Using  an artificial intelligence data  mining  interface,  systematic monitoring of  
 
12 The Wastewater  Epidemiology To Examine Stimulant Trends (weTEST)  project  will implement  a wastewater -
based  epidemiology (WBE)  approach  for comprehensive,  non-invasive monitoring of drug flows  in communities  in 
near real-time,  effectively  developing a novel drug surveillance strategy  to identify specific stimulant  drugs and their 
concentrations in samples  taken  from  wastewater  systems,  and extrapolating to population- level  use estimates.  
https://nij.ojp.gov/funding/awards/2020- r2-cx-0013   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  117 online  drug fora  like Bluelight,  Reddit,  and Erowid may  shed  light  on the  substances  
current  drug users  seek  and purchase  on the Internet. Other  methods  used  internationally  
that may  be useful  in the U.S.  include  scraping the  web  or the  darknet, analysis  of used  
syringes, and indirect  measures  of drug use,  de-identified  data  such  as “patient  
questionnaires,  patient  self-reports, pill  counts, rates  of prescription  refills,  assessment  of 
patient’s  clinical  response, electronic medication  monitors, measurement  of physiologic  
markers”.443 
Geospatial  analysis  is not new,  but is currently  underutilized  in relation  to drug use  data 
and drug policy. Such  analyses  can shed  light  on the  relationships  between  drug use  
patterns,  demographic  attributes,  and geographic  location.  For example,  rural -urban 
differences  provide  a useful  lens for examining  patterns  of substance  use, morbidity  and 
mortality  along with  the distribution  and accessibility  of treatment  and other  services,444 
such as harm  reduction  and peer  recovery support  services,  relative to  underserved 
populations.  
C. Develop methods for identifying emerging drug use trends in real time or near real 
time. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA, OJP; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA; OSTP)  
New drugs  and new  patterns  of use  are, by definition, difficult  to identify  because one  has 
to know  what  to look for. This  is where  studying individuals  at high  risk of drug use  can 
give a warning of what  new  drugs  are on the horizon. The  rationale  for the  now -defunct  
ADAM  was to study a  high-risk  population (male arrestees  shortly after  booking) with  
interviews  (self -report) and a  biological  specimen  (urine  sample)  to corroborate  self-
report. This  was done  at the local  level  because drug use  patterns  vary with  geography 
and the  logistics  of data  collection  were  better  organized at  the local  level.  At present, 
there  is no system  in place to  collect  these  data from  high -risk populations  and we  
continue  to have  a blind spot  in this area.  
Along these lines,  the National  Drug  Early  Warning System  (NDEWS),  a system  of 18 
sentinel  sites  across  the country designed  to provide  early  warning is funded by NIDA.  
NDEWS  was developed through the  Community Epidemiology  Work Group (CEWG). 
NDEWS  assembles  traditional  surveillance data for local  areas  from  treatment  
admissions,  poison control  report s, hospital  and emergency  department  records, mortality  
data from  medical  examiners,  and laboratory sampling  of seized  drugs. Another example 
is the NIJ -funded NPS Discovery, a research program that works in collaboration with 
law enforcement, public health, and public safety agencies to rapidly identify emerging drugs, also known as Novel Psychoactive Substances (NPS), associated with intoxications and adverse events.  The information, trend reports, and resources 
consolidated here by NPS Discovery all ow for the rapid dissemination of information to 
stakeholders and affected communities.  Additional novel  surveillance  methods  are 
planned, including  machine learning  to study  online  drug markets  and social  media 
content,  drug checking, rapid  street  reporti ng, and, potentially,  wastewater -based  
epidemiology.  
D.  Develop methods to evaluate the impact of supply reduction efforts on public health and public safety outcomes. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA; HHS/ASPE, CDC, NIH, SAMHSA; IC) 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  118 New research  and data sets  are needed in order to  draw  definitive conclusions  about  the 
effects  of the  spectrum  of supply reduction  activities —such  as eradication,  interdiction,  
investigations,  alternative development —on public  health  and public  safety  outcomes  so 
that we can better  understand the  return on  supply reduction investments  and develop 
more  outcome focused interventions. For  example,  existing  data  sets and analyses  are 
inadequate  to determine whether  reductions  in cultivation  resulting  from  eradication,  or 
changes  in maritime and airborne  interdiction  in the transit  zone  are associated  with 
changes  in drug use  prevalence of the number of drug overdoses  in the United  States.  
Research  is required to better  understand how drug production, transport, and distribution 
respond to  interdiction  and domestic  enforcement  activities,  and to  develop  a formal  
model  of the  complex  dynamics  connecting  supply reduction efforts  to domestic  drug 
prices  and consumption.445 Such  a model  will improve  our ability  to anticipate and assess 
the impact  of supply reduction policy and resourcing decisions  on public  health  and 
safety.   
E. Establish systems to collect and analyze data on subpopulations at high risk of drug 
use for which data is inadequate.  (Agencies Involved: DO J/DEA; HHS/CDC, NIH, 
SAMHSA)  
As noted earlier , there is  a need  to establish  systems  to collect  and analyze data  on 
subpopulations  at high  risk of drug use  that are not adequately  covered  by existing  data 
systems.  This  includes  data on racial,  ethnic,  and other  minority  groups  needed to  address  
equity  issues.  
The data  collection  involving arrestees  conducted  under ADAM  provides  an example of 
such a targeted  data collection  effort, covering a  subpopulation of male arrestees  and 
providing a  window  into emerging  drug use  trends  based  on self -reported use  
corroborated with  biological  samples.  Additionally, data  could  be disaggregated at  the 
local  level,  and the  results  used  in the synthetic  estimation  of broader drug indicators, 
such as drug consumption and estimations  of the  amount  of money people  who  use drugs  
in America spend on illegal  drugs.  
Other  populations  at high risk  of drug use  that are outside  the realm  of survey samples  
include  people  experiencing  homelessness,  sex workers, and institutionalized  
populations. The  rural  population is  also under-represented  in many  data  systems.  
Reaching  these groups  requires  labor- intensive  and costly  efforts. Nonetheless,  without  
such efforts  the U.S.  is at significant  risk of missing  large  pockets  of problematic  drug 
use within  our population. The  Data  IWG  can be harnessed  to focus  these activities  for 
this type  of research.  
F. Support data collection practices that enhance standardization, accuracy, timeliness 
and relevance to policy. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA, OJP; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA; OSTP) 
Data and reporting standards  are necessary  to ensure  the timeliness,  accuracy  and 
relevance of data utilized  to develop drug policy. Existing  data  collection  efforts, 
particul arly at the State and local  levels,  can be strengthened  by developing  and 
improving guidance  that standardizes  the measurement  of key  variables  that are 
ultimately  necessary  for describing  and comparing  drug behaviors  and outcomes.  Such  
standards  can also enhance collection  by non -governmental  organizations. While such 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  119 standards do not currently exist in the drug arena, a growing effort, such as that embodied 
in the National Information Exchange Model (NIEM) 446 can inform this process of 
standardizatio n and interoperability. Federal  data  collection  agencies  can promote  such  
efforts  in their  ongoing work with  their  data  partners. In addition, to  facilitate geospatial  
analysis,  U.S.  Federal  Information Processing  Standards  (FIPS)  codes  should be  
included  in datasets  except  in cases  where  it may  compromise  privacy.  
Principle 3: Enhance  the utility of drug  data for 
practitioners,  researchers,  and policy-makers  
Data must  be accurate,  timely  and relevant  to the decisions  made  by practitioners,  researchers, 
and policymakers.  Of course, data is only useful  if it is accessible by those  who  need  it. 
Expanded mechanisms  for compiling,  analyzing  and sharing the  outputs  of drug-related  research  
and data collection  activities  with  potenti al users  must  be established,  maintained,  and improved 
to support  a more  comprehensive,  multi -faceted,  and evidence-based  approach to  drug control  
efforts. To  the extent  possible, data must  be useful  at the community  level,  although such 
granular data  is rarely  available at  this time.  
A. Improve data accessibility. (Agencies Involved: DOJ/DEA, OJP; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA)  
While the information systems  discussed  above  are useful  for collecting  and managing  
data,  additional  capabilities  are required to  make information easily  accessible to  diverse  
end users.  In particular,  two forms  of accessible data are necessary:  summary data  in an 
online  data  dashboard, and public  use data  for analysis  by data  users.  
a) Summary data can be made available in a searchable online data dashboard that consolidates drug-related data from multiple information systems along with data on other factors relevant to drug control (e.g. demographic, geospatial, socio -economic, supply, interdiction indicators). ONDCP’s 
reauthorization language requires such a dashboard,
447 and it is currently in 
development. Upon implementation, the dashboard should be searchable, 
user-friendly, and transparent, not unlike some already in use elsewhere, such 
as the U nited Nations World Drug Report.448 ONDCP is mandated to maintain 
and update the Drug Control Data Dashboard with data obtained from federal 
agencies and other authoritative sources.  
b) Public use  data  need  to be accessible for analysis  by diverse  stakeholders . 
Summary  data  published by reporting agencies  are only  the tip of the 
information iceberg. Many  federal  data  systems  track  a plethora  of variables  
that can be analyzed  by researchers  or others  to address  more  specific  policy 
questions. Some  data  systems  generate readily  accessible public  use data  that 
can be mined  to explore  a wide  array of research  questions, including, to a 
limited  extent,  questions  on underserved populations.  
For example,  NSDUH public  use data  files  typically  become available around 
the same time that  SAMHSA  releases  the annual  summary findings. Similarly,  
NCHS  makes  record-level  death  certificate data available for further analysis  
through WONDER  (Wide -ranging Online  Data for Epidemiologic Research),  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  120 a menu -driven online  system  of the CDC  that provides  access  to a wide  array  
of public  health  information.  
However, other data  systems  do not  routinely  make primary data  available for 
analysis.  Some  provide  restricted  access  (e.g., NSS,  NFLIS),  and others  
provide  limited  (e.g., N -SSATS)  or no access  beyond what  is published in  
summary  form. Not  all data  systems  provide  adequate  documentation  for 
analysts  to utilize the  data  fully, and there is a need  to improve  access  to 
primary data  for analysts.   
B. Increase access to searchable compendia of evidence-based interventions.  (Agencies 
Involved: DOJ/DEA; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA) 
In addition  to data,  states,  local  governments, provider organizations, and others  need  the 
knowledge  and skills  to identify  and implement  evidence-based  interventions.  The 
Strategy ’s priority areas  rely heavily  on the  adoption of evidence-based  approaches  for 
prevention, harm -reduction, treatment,  recovery support, criminal  justice reform, and  
interventions  supporting drug policy.  
Agencies  have  approached the  task of disseminating  evidence-based  practices  in various  
ways,  from  published reports  to online  resources  or combinations  of both. The CDC  
publication, Overdose:  What’s  working in  the United  States,  an overview  of evidence-
based  strategies  for preventing drug overdose449 includes  the scientific basis,  how  and 
why the strategy  works, and examples  of organizations  that have  put the practice to  work. 
Similarly,  SAMHSA’s longstanding Treatment  Improvement  Protocol  (TIP)  series  
provides  guidelines  for implementing  various  evidence-based  approaches.  
Online  resources  continue  to evolve,  and SAMHSA  is a case in  point. In 2017, it  
discontinued its longstanding National  Registry of  Evidence-based Programs  and 
Practices  (NREPP), replacing  it in 2018 with the Evidence- Based  Practices  Resource  
Center  (EBPRC). NREPP compiled  and updated  effective,  science -based  behavioral  
health  interventions,  including  for the  prevention and treatment  of SUD. Besides  proven 
interventions  that were  independently  audited, the  registry  also began to include  
programs  to avoid because they  had not been  shown to  work sufficiently.450 Its successor, 
EBPRC was  established  with  the same  goals.”451 ONDCP  will work with  SAMHSA,  
NIDA,  NIAAA,  NIC, NIJ,  CDC,  and other federal  agencies  to further clarify  the process  
for identification  or external  submission  of practices  for consideration, and the  criteria for 
inclusion  in the new  resource.  
Other  agencies  also have  searchable databases.  For example,  the National  Institute of  
Justice maintains  the Crime  Solutions  website,452 a topical  repository that  assists 
practitioners  and policy  makers  in decision  making  and program  implementation  by 
providing information on justice-related  programs  and practices  meeting  standard 
evidentiary  criteria of effectiveness.  Inclusion and evaluation  criteria are  clearly  
described  and included practices  are reviewed  by two  experts  using objective scoring 
criteria to  rate the strength  of the  evidence  supporting the  practice.   
Despite these and other  federal  resource  repositories, the  evidence base,  in general,  is not 
easy to access,  and the  quality  of existing  resources  is uneven. Unintended consequences  
are not typically  included  in these assessments.  Search  filters  often include sub -
populations  with  specific  needs  (such as  females  or major  racial  groups), but  do not  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  121 currently include other  underserved populations  such  as ethnic or sexual  minorities,  or 
rural  populations. Besides  the need  to expand the  underlying research  base  to address  
equity  issues,  there is  also a strong need  to improve  access  to and the  utility  of evidence 
that already  exists.  This  is true not only  for databases  collected  specifically  around 
substance  use purposes, but  also more  general  health  and population data sets  of 
relevance to substance  use (such as databases  of the  medical  literature which  are not 
devoted solely  to substance  use issues but  certainly  contain  key information about  
substance  use; the challenge is  how  to withdraw  that information from  the more  general  
data sets).   
It is not necessary  to have  a single  centralized  government  repository for evidence-based  
interventions.  Moreover, the  breadth of such  a portal  might  limit  its utility.  ONDCP  
recommends  that agencies  curate their respective knowledge  base  materials  or enter  into 
selected  interagency  partnerships  for this  purpose. Agencies  should provide  clear  criteria 
for determining  what  interventions  or programs  to include, identifying  research  
supporting the  evidence,  describing  the sub-populations  to which  practices  apply, and 
indicating  any known unintended consequences  or potential  complications.  Such  
repositories  should be  searchable and should be  continually updated.  
C. Expand datasets and data collection processes to permit greater disaggregation by 
subpopulations, including marginalized or underserved groups.  (Agencies Involved: 
DOJ/DEA; DOT/NHTSA; HHS/CDC, NIH, SAMHSA)  
Prevalence,  treatment  access,  outcome  or other drug data  can rarely be  disaggregated by 
group other than  by age, gender, races  other  than  Black  or White, and Hispanic  ethnicity.  
For example,  while  NSDUH has  released  a series  of slides  focused on smaller  
subpopulations  such  as American  Indians  and Alaska Natives;  Asians/Native Hawaiians  
and Other  Pacific Islanders;  veterans;  and lesbian,  gay, transgender, and bisexual  adults,  
these standalone  statistics  are not routinely included  in their  published tables.  As we 
proceed with this effort, we also need to routinely perform disclosure risk analysis as the 
sample sizes get smaller for minority subgroups to protect individual privacy.  
An inventory of the  subpopulations  identified  in existing  surveys  is necessary. In addition  
to racial  or ethnic  minorities,  these should include  sexual  or religious  minorities,  rural  
residents,  migrants,  and other  groups. While annual  analysis  may  not be possible  due to 
small  numbers, aggregating  data for multipl e years  for the  subpopulation in  question  can 
still provide  a picture  that can inform  policy. Multiple years  of data will  need  to be 
aggregated to  yield  stable estimates,  unless  additional  resources  are expended to  
oversample  such  subpopulations. As  an alternative,  researchers  may  determine that  
certain  purposive  sampling  strategies  targeting  minority populations  can be adopted  as a 
complement  to the primary sampling  mechanism.  
D. Expand law enforcement and intelligence community information sharing and strengthen information sharing framework across departments. (Agencies Involved: DHS/CBP, ICE, USCG; DOJ/ATF, DEA, FBI; OCDETF; DOD; ONDCP/HIDTA; IC; Treasury/FINCEN, IRS)  
Transnational  criminal  organizations  (TCOs)  are a complex  and constantly  evolving  
threat  that requires  a comprehensive  and flexible  approach. Multiple National  Drug 
Control  Program  agencies  and intelligence  community  entities  collect  useful  data  that can 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  122 be used  to target,  disrupt, dismantle,  and degrade  TCO  operations  and drug trafficking 
efforts. Additional  resources  should be  devoted to  aggregating th ese numerous  datasets  
and information systems  for timely  analysis  to thwart  the threat  of TCOs.  While 
intelligence and law enforcement  evidence is  gathered  with  unique  end goals  in mind,  
both methods  produce  volumes  of data  that can illuminate criminal  networks  and support  
targeted  interdictions  and investigations  to disrupt  and dismantle TCOs,  affiliates,  and 
local  street  gangs  involved in  the illicit  drug trade.  
Current  developments , including those in information technology and geospatial  analysis,  have  
permitted  advances  in some  areas  of drug research, but  many  challenges  remain.  In order to  
develop a  robust  and timely  data  system  to support  the National Drug Control Strategy , we 
recommend  the following:  
• Facilitate a  regular  periodic  review  of drug data needs  and data  access  requirements  
(Lead Agency:  ONDCP  through Data  IWG)  
• Engage  and motivate data  partners, especially  State and local  collectors  that contribute to  
national  data  compilations  (Agencies  Involved: DOJ/DEA;  DOT/NHTSA;  HHS/CDC,  
NIH, SAMHSA) 
• Advance  the analytical  integration  of multiple sources  of data  to mitigate weaknesses  
inherent  in single  data sources  while maintai ning privacy and confidentiality (Agencies  
Involved: DOJ,  DEA;  DOT/NHTSA;  HHS/CDC,  NIH, SAMHSA; DOD;  ONDCP)  
• Support  the establishment  of new  data  sources  and analyses  to fill data  gaps  (Agencies  
Involved:  DOJ/DEA,  OJP;  DOD; HHS/CDC,  NIH, SAMHSA)  
• Accelerate and streamline access  to data,  findings, and evidence -based  interventions  
(Agencies  Involved: DOD;  DOJ/DEA;  DOT/NHTSA;  HHS/CDC,  NIH,  SAMHSA; 
ONDCP) . 
In addition  to monitoring specific Strategy  goals  and objectives,  it is necessary  to pursue  a 
sustained  long-term  effort  to revitalize our  drug data systems  in order to  measure  progress  in the 
Strategy’s  priority areas.   
  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  123 Appendix  A—Developing  a Data Plan  
The SUPPORT  Act includes  a statutory requirement  for developing a “systematic plan  for 
increasing  data  collection  to enable  real time surveillance  of drug control  threats,  developing 
analysis  and monitoring capabilities,  and identifying and addressing policy  questions  related  to 
the National  Drug Control  Strategy  and Pro gram.”∗  
The Biden-Harris  administration  also has articulated  seven  drug policy  priorities,  specifically  the 
following:   
• Expanding access  to evidence-based  treatment  
• Advancing racial  equity in  our approach to  drug policy  
• Enhancing evidence-based  harm  reduction  efforts  
• Supporting evidence-based  prevention efforts  to reduce  youth substance  use 
• Reducing the  supply of illicit  substances  
• Advancing recovery-ready workplaces  and expanding the  addiction  workforce  
• Expanding access  to recovery support  services.   
These priority areas  are folded into  the 2022 National Drug Control Strategy . We envision a  data  
plan to be developed  that blends  the statutory requirements  and the Administration’s  priorities. 
The plan  will be multi -faceted  and informed by regular consultation  with  our interagency  
partners, and development  will continue  into next  year.  
Background 
The previous  Administration  published a Data Plan,  appended to the 2020 NDCS,  that was 
opaque  in terms  of how  it was formulated  and how  it would be  pursued. This  Administration  is 
in the process  of reformulating such  a data plan  that is aligned  with  the current  drug control  
priority areas  and that undergoes a  transparent  process  of development,  with  the involvement  of 
subject  matter  experts  in drug control  agencies  to formulate  key policy  questions  pertaining to 
the National Drug Control Strategy . Such  an interagency  effort, led by ONDCP  through the  
Drug Data Interagency  Working Group (Data IWG), will  recommend  options, including 
resources  required, for obtaining data  in near -real-time to address  such  questions. Specific 
elements  specified  by statute  are listed  in the inset  box below. 
 
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗ 21 U.S.C.  § 1705(c)(1)(M),  National Drug Control Strategy . 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  124  
Process 
The Data Plan  development process began with  the reconstitution  of the  Data  IWG in  December  
2021 and is  systematically  proceeding with  identifying  policy questions, and then addressing 
such questions with  relevant data.   
Topical  areas  for potential policy questions to  be developed  with  interagency  input would likely  
include the following: drug overdose, treatment,  resource tracking,  drug supply reduction,  illicit 
financing, and emerging drug threats.  
We anticipate that  as the iterative work proceeds, sub -committees  of the  Data IWG  will be 
focusing on specific topical areas.  For example,  a sub -committee focusing on fatal and  non-fatal  
overdoses could include agencies  compiling  data from forensic laboratories, emergency medical 
services,  death  certificates,  hospital admissions,  and visits  to emergency  departments.  Similarly,  
a sub -committee focusing on drug supply issues could include the intelligence community, law  
enforcement and drug interdiction  agencies,  and forensic laboratories.  
We also  anticipate that  the timing  of the  data plan  development process will be coordinated  with  
the budget cycle so  that recommendations  can be incorporated into  the agency  budget requests so  
we can obtain the  resources needed to  execute planned improvements or new activities.  Items to include  in the Data Plan  
    ‘‘(i) a list  of policy -relevant questions for  which  the Director  and each  National  Drug 
Control Program Agency intends to  develop evidence to  support the  National  Drug Control 
Program and Strategy; 
    ‘‘(ii) a list  of data  the Director  and each  National Drug Control Program Agency  intends 
to collect,  use, or acquire to  facilitate the use  of evidence in  drug control policymaking  and 
monitoring; 
    ‘‘(iii) a list of methods and analytical  approaches that  may  be used  to develop  evidence 
to support the National  Drug Control Program and Strategy  and related  policy;  
    ‘‘(iv) a list  of any challenges  to developing  evidence to  support policymaking,  including 
any barriers to  accessing,  collecting,  or using relevant data;  
    ‘‘(v) a description  of the  steps  the Director  and the head  of each National  Drug Control 
Program Agency will  take to  effectuate the plan; and 
    ‘‘(vi) any other relevant information as  determined  by the  Director. 
Source:  21 U.S.C. § 1705(c)(1)(M), National  Drug  Control Strategy.   
 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  125 A robust  Data Plan  can lead to real-time or  near -real-time surveillance  tools  for monitoring drug-
related  causes  and consequences  in the public  health,  public  safety,  and drug supply arenas.  In 
addition, data for tracking progress  towards  stated  goals, as  documented  in the Strategy’s  PRS 
report ,13 can be improved in  quality  and timeliness.  
Outlook 
A rigorous  Data Plan  is expected  to take  approximately one  year  to develop fully, with  
consideration of budget  cycle timing.  The plan’s  successful  implementation  will depend largely  
on the  availability  of resources, including  staff and funding to  improve  existing  data  or to 
establish  new  sources  or methods  of utilizing  data.   
  
 
13 The PRS report  is a separate document  that is part of the National Drug Control Strategy requirements.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  126 Works Cited  
 
1 NCHS, National Vital Statistics System. Estimates for 2020 are based on provisional data. Estimates for 2015 -
2019 are based on final data (available from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/mortality_public_use_data.htm ). 
2 From 2016 to 2020, numbers of U.S. injury deaths by firearms increased by 17 percent, those by suicide increased 
by two percent, homicide by 27 percent, and those by motor vehicle crash increased by five percent. Injury 
death categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, 4,329 suicides  in 2020 were by drug overdose. 
[Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, Multiple Cause of Death, 1999- 2020 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released December 2021. Extracted by ONDCP 
on December 22, 2021.]  
3 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, National Survey on Drug Use and Health 2019. 
Unpublished Special Tabulation by the Center for Behavioral Health Statistics & Quality (June 2021).  
4 Odgers C, Caspi A, Nagin D, et al. Is It Important to Prevent Early Exposure to Drugs and Alcohol Among 
Adolescents? Psychol Sci. Oct 2008; 19(10):1037– 1044. Accessed July 23, 2021.  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC36644 02/  
5 Newcomb M, Felix -Ortiz M. Multiple protective and risk factors for drug use and abuse: Cross -sectional and 
prospective findings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1992; 63(2),  280–296. Accessed July 
23, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.63.2.280   
6 Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents. A Research- Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and 
Community Leaders. Second Edition. National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Insti tutes of Health, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. NIH Publication No. 04- 4212(A). Second Edition October 
2003. Accessed July 23, 2021. https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/preventingdruguse_2.pdf   
7 Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Childhood: A Research- Based Guide. National Institute on 
Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. March 20 16. 
Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/early_childhood_prevention_march_2016.pdf  
8 Holly Hagan, James P McGough, Hanne Thiede, Sharon Hopkins, Jeffrey Duchin, E.Russell Alexander, Reduced 
injection frequency and increased entry and retention in drug treatment associated with needle -exchange 
participation in Seattle drug injectors, Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, Volume 19, Issue 3, 2000, Pages 247- 252, ISSN 0740-5472, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0740-5472(00)00104-5
.  
9  SAMHSA. “2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.” October 2021. Detailed Tables - Table 5.32A 
Classified as Needing Illicit Drug Use Treatment. 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt35323/NSDUHDetailedTabs2020/NSDUHDetail
edTabs2020/NSDUHDetTabsSect5pe2020.htm   
10 Hall OT, Jordan A, Teater J, et al. Experiences of racial discriminat ion in the medical setting and associations 
with medical mistrust and expectations of care among black patients seeking addiction treatment [published 
online ahead of print, 2021 Jun 25]. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2021;108551. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2021.108551 
11 van Boekel LC, Brouwers EPM, van Weeghel J, Garretsen HFL. Stigma among health professionals towards 
patients with substance use disorders and its consequences for healthcare delivery: Systematic review. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 2013;131(1-2):23- 35. doi :10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.02.018 
12 SAMHSA. “2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.” October 2021. Detailed Tables - Table 6.36A 
Perceived Recovery from a Substance Use Problem. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2020-nsduh-
detailed -tables   
13 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. SAMHSA’s Working Definition of Recovery. 
2010. Retrieved by ONDCP on May 24, 2021 at https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/fi les/d7/priv/pep12-
recdef.pdf  
14 SAMHSA. “2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.” October 2021. Detailed Tables - Table 6.35A 
Perceived Ever Having Had a Substance Use Problem. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2020-nsduh-
detailed -tables  
15 SAMHSA.  “2020 National  Survey on Drug  Use and Health.” October  2021. Detailed  Tables  - Table  6.36A 
Perceived  Recovery  from  a Substance Use Problem. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2020-nsduh-
detailed -tables  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  127  
16 Kelly  JF, Bergman  B, Hoeppner BB, Vilsaint C, White  WL. Prevalence and pathways of recovery  from  drug and 
alcohol problems in the United  States  population: Implications  for practice,  research,  and policy. Drug  
Alcohol Depend. 2017;181:162-169. 
17 U.S. Department  of Justice  Drug  Enforcement  Administration.  2020 National  Drug  Threat  Assessment.  March  
2021; DEA- DCT -DIR-008-21: 2. 
18 Columbia University. National  Center  on Addiction and Substance Abuse. Behind Bars I I : Substance Abuse and 
America's  Prison  Population. New  York,  NY: National  Center  on Addiction and Substance Abuse at 
Columbia University; 2010. 
19 Gross,  S., R., Possley,  M., & Stephens, K. (2017). Race and Wrongful Convictions in the United  States.  The 
National  Registry  of Exonerations, Newkirk  Center  for Science and Society.  
http://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Documents/Race_and_Wrongful_Convictions.pdf   
20Binswanger IA, Stern  MF, Deyo  RA, et al. Release from  prison — a high risk of death  for former  inmates.  The 
new england journal of medicine. 2007;356(2):157-165. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa064115. 
21 Ranapurwala SI, Shanahan  ME, Alexandridis AA, et al. Opioid overdose mortality  among former  north  carolina 
inmates: 2000–2015. American  journal of public health . 2018;108(9):1207-1213. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2018.304514 
22 The White  House. Memorandum on Restoring Trust  in Government Through Scientific  Integrity  and Evidence-
Based  Policymaking. January  27, 2021. Available  at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/memorandum-on-restoring- trust-in-government-through- scientific -
integrity -and-evidence- based -policymaking/ . A ccessed  on January  6, 2022. 
23 Substance Abuse and Mental  Health  Services  Administration,  National  Survey on Drug  Use and Health  2019. 
Unpublished Special  Tabulation by the Center  for Behavioral  Health  Statistics  & Quality  (June 2021). 
24 Compton W, Thomas Y, Stinson F, et al. Prevalence,  Correlates,  Disability,  and Comorbidity  of DSM -IV Drug  
Abuse and Dependence in the United  States:  Results  From the National  Epidemiologic Survey  on Alcohol 
and Related  Conditions. Archives  of General  Psychology, 2007 May;64(5):566-76. Accessed  November 
2021 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17485608/  
25 Huttenlocher PR, Dabholkar AS. Regional differences  in synaptogenesis in human cerebral  cortex.  J Comp  
Neurol. 1997 Oct 20;387(2):167-78. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19971020)387:2<167::aid-
cne1>3.0.co;2- z. PMID:  9336221.  
26 Petanjek  Z, Judaš M, Šimic  G, Rasin  MR, Uylings HB, Rakic  P, Kostovic I. Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic 
spines in the human prefrontal cortex.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 9;108(32):13281-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1105108108. Epub 2011 Jul 25. PMID:  21788513; PMCID:  PMC3156171.  
27 Arria,  A , Caldeira,  K, Bugbee B, et al. The academic opportunity costs of substance use during college.  College 
Park,  MD:  Center  on Young Adult Health  and Development. 2013. Accessed  November 2021. 
www.cls.umd.edu/docs/AcadOppCosts.pdf  
28 Gobbi G, Tobias A, Zytynski T, et al., Association  of Cannabis Use in Adolescence and Risk of Depression, 
Anxiety, and Suicidality  in Young Adulthood: A Systematic  Review  and Meta -analysis,  JAMA  Psychiatry. 
2019;1;76(4):426-434. Accessed  November 2021. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30758486/  
29 Tice,  P, Lipari,  R, and Van Horn,  S. Substance use among 12th grade  aged  youths, by dropout status.  The CBHSQ  
Report: August 15, 2017. Center  for Behavioral  Health  Statistics  and Quality,  Substance Abuse and Mental  
Health  Services  Administration,  Rockville, MD. Accessed  November 2021. 
https://www.samhsa .gov/data/sites/default/files/report_3196/ShortReport-3196.html  
30 Grant  BF, Dawson  DA. Age of onset of drug use and its association  with DSM -IV drug abuse and dependence:  
results  from  the National  Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic  Survey. J Subst Abuse. 1998;10(2):163-73. 
doi: 10.1016/s0899-3289(99)80131-x. PMID:  9854701.  
31 Kessler  RC, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Berglund PA, Caraveo -Anduaga JJ, DeWit  DJ, Greenfield  SF, Kolody B, Olfson  
M, Vega WA.  Patterns  and predictors  of treatment  seeking  after onset of a substance use disorder. Arch  
Gen Psychiatry. 2001 Nov;58(11):1065-71. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.58.11.1065. PMID:  11695954.  
32 Salmanzadeh  H, Ahmadi- Soleimani SM, Pachenari  N, Azadi  M, Halliwell RF, Rubino T, Azizi  H. Adolescent  
drug exposure: A review  of evidence for the development of persistent  changes  in brain  function. Brain  Res 
Bull.  2020 Mar;156:105-117. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2020.01.007. Epub 2020 Jan 8. PMID:  31926303.  
33 Monti P, Miranda R, Nixon K, et al. Adolescence: Booze, Brains, and Behavior.  Alcohol Clin Exp Res, Vol 29, 
No 2, 2005: pp 207–220. Accessed November 2021. http://georgicounseling.com/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/Adolescence-booze- brains -behavior-2005.pdf  
34 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Fostering healthy mental, emotional, and Behavioral 
development in children and youth. The National Academies Press. 2019. doi:10.17226/25201  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  128  
35 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Social 
Determinants of Health Workgroup. Healthy People 2030.  Accessed July 2021. 
https://health.gov/healthypeople/about/workgroups/social- determinants -health -workgroup   
36 Bohler R, Thomas C, Clark T, Horgan C. Addressing the Opioid Crisis through Social Determinants of Health: 
What Are Communities Doing? 2021 . Opioid Policy Research Collaborative at Brandeis University.  
37 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About Social 
Determinants of Health (SDOH). Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/about.html .  
38 Chung E, Siegel B, Garg A, et al. Screening for Social Determinants of Health Among Children and 
Families Living in Poverty: A Guide for Clinicians. Curr Probl Pediatr A dolesc Health Care. 
2016; 46(5): 135–153. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6039226/ . Accessed 
September 1, 2021.  
39 Allen,J, et al. 4, Social determinants of mental health. In ternational Review of Psychiatry, 2014; Vol. 26, pp. 392-
407. 
40 Rusby, J. C., Light, J. M., Crowley, R., & Westling, E. Influence of parent –youth relationship, parental 
monitoring, and parent substance use on adolescent substance use onset. Journal of Family Psychology, 
2018;32(3), 310–320.  
41 Monitoring the Future Study. Monitoring the Future is an annual drug use survey of eighth, 10th and  
12th grade students conducted by researchers at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and 
funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. https://www.drugabuse.gov/drug-topics/trends-
statistics/monitoring -future . 
42 Boardman JD, Finch BK, Ellison CG, Williams DR, Jackson JS. Neighborhood disadvantage, stress, and drug use 
among adults. J Health Soc Behav. 2001 Jun;42(2):151- 65. PMID: 11467250 . 
43 Housing Instability and Concurrent Substance use and Mental Health Concerns: An Examination of 
Canadian Youth. Smith, T, et al. 3, 2017, J Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, Vol. 26, pp. 214-223. 
44 Association of family income supplements in adolescence with development of psychiatric and substance use  
disorders in adulthood among an American Indian population. Costello, E J, et al. 19, 2010, JAMA, Vol. 
303, pp. 1954-1960. 
45 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Adverse Childhood Experiences Preve ntion Strategy. National Center 
for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Accessed July 23, 2021.   
https://www.cdc.gov/injury/pd fs/priority/ACEs -Strategic -Plan_Final_508.pdf   
46 Powell, T. M., & Davis, J. P. (2019). Addressing the social emotional needs of children in chronic poverty: A 
pilot of the Journey of Hope. Children and Youth Services Review , 98, 319-327. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2018.11.010  
47 Huang Y, Liu H, Masum M. Adverse Childhood Experiences and Physical and Mental Health of Adults: 
Assessing the Mediating Role of Cumulative Life Course Poverty. Am J Health Promot. 2021 
Jun;35(5):637- 647. doi: 10.1177/0890117120982407. Epub 2020 Dec 24. PMID: 33356410.  
48 Kim, H. G., Kuendig, J., Prasad, K., & Sexter, A. (2020). Exposure to Racism and Other Adverse Childhood 
Experiences Among Perinatal Wom en with Moderate to Severe Mental Illness. Community mental health 
journal, 56(5), 867–874. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-020-00550-6  
49 Felitti V, Anda R, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of 
the Leading Causes of Death in Adults:  The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study.  American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine.  1998; (1) 4: 245-258. Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.ajpmonline.org/article/S0749 -3797(98)00017- 8/fulltext   
50 Anda R, Dube S, Felitti V, et al. Childhood Abuse, Neglect, and Household Dysfunction and the Risk of Illicit 
Drug Use: The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study.  Pediatrics . 2003;111;564.  Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.icmec.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/10/ACE- and-Illicit- Drug -Use-Pediatrics -2003.pdf   
51 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). Preventing Adverse Childhood Experiences: Leveraging the 
Best Available Evidence. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  
52 Substance Ab use and Mental Health Services Administration. SAMHSA’s Concept of Trauma and Guidance for a 
Trauma- Informed Approach. HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14- 4884. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration, 2014. https://ncsacw.samhsa.gov/userfiles/files/SAMHSA_Trauma.pdf
 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  129  
53 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). Preventing Adverse Childhood Experiences: Leveraging the 
Best Available Evidence. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/preventingACES.pdf  
54 Centers for D isease Control and Prevention (2019). Preventing Adverse Childhood Experiences: Leveraging the 
best available evidence. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/preventingACES-508.pdf  
55 Odgers C, Caspi A, Nagin D, et al. Is It Important to Prevent Early Exposure to Drugs and Alcohol Among 
Adolescents? Psychol Sci. Oct 2008; 19(10):1037– 1044. Accessed July 23, 2021.  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3664402/   
56 Newcomb M, Felix -Ortiz M. Multiple protective and risk factors for drug use and abuse: Cross -sectional and 
prospective findings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1992; 63(2),  280–296. Accessed July 
23, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.63.2.280   
57 Dennis M, Clark H, Huang, L. The need and opportunity to expand substance use disorder treatment in school -
based settings. Advances in School Mental Health Promotion. 2014; 7:2, 75-87. Accessed July 22, 2019. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1754730X.2014.888221   
58  Odgers C, Caspi A, Nagin D, et al. Is It Important to Prevent Early Exposure to Drugs and Alcohol 
Among Adolescents? Psychol Sci. Oct 2008; 19( 10):1037–1044. Accessed July 23, 2021.  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3664402/   
59 Newcomb M, Felix -Ortiz M. Multiple protective and risk factors for drug use and abuse: Cross -sectional 
and prospective findings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1992; 63(2), 280–296. 
Accessed July 23, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.63.2.280  
60 Grant BF, Dawson DA. Age of onset of drug use and its association with DSM -IV drug abuse and dependence: 
results from the National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey. J Subst Abuse. 1998;10(2):163-73. 
doi: 10.1016/s0899-3289(99)80131- x. PMID: 9854701.  
61 Clayton HB, Bohm MK, Lowry R, Ashley C, Ethier KA. Prescription opioid misuse associated with risk 
behaviors among adolescents. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2019;57(4), 533–539. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.05.017  
62 Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Lee SM, Maynard M, Drown DR, Kohl III HW, Dietz WH. Physical education and 
academic achievement in elementary school: data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study. American 
Journal of Public Health2008;98(4):721–727. 
63 Rasberry CN, Tiu GF, Kann L, McManus T, Michael SL, Merlo CL, Lee SM, Bohm MK, Annor F, Ethier K. 
Health -related behaviors and academic achievement among high school students —United States, 2015. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep2917;66:922-927.  
64 Monitoring the Future Study. Monitoring the Future is an annual drug use survey of eighth, 10th and12th 
grade students conducted by researchers at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. 
https://www.drugabuse.gov/drug-topics/trends-
statistics/monitoring -future . 
65 Jones C, Clayton H, Deputy N. et al. Prescription Opioid Misuse and Use of Alcohol and Other Substances 
Among High School Students — Youth Risk Behavior Survey, United States, 2019.  Supplements / August 
21, 2020 / 69(1);38–46. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/su/su6901a5.htm  
66 Jones C, Clayton H, Deputy N. et al. Prescription Opioid Misuse and Use of Alcohol and Other Substances 
Among High School Students — Youth Risk Behavior Survey, United States, 2019.  Supplements / August 
21, 2020 / 69(1);38–46. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/su/su6901a5.htm  
67 Wang TW, Neff LJ, Park -Lee E, Ren C, Cullen KA, King BA. E -cigarette Use Among Middle and High 
School Students — United States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2020;69:1310–1312. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6937e1 . 
68 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Wide -Ranging Online Data for Epidemiologic Research 
(WONDER).  Data provided by CDC. February 2022.  
69 Substance Use and Associated Health Conditions throughout the Lifespan. Public Health Rev. 2014; 35(2).  
Accessed July 23, 2021. https://web -
beta.archive.org/web/20150206061220/http://www.publichealthreviews.eu/upload/pdf_files/14/00_Schulte
_Hser.pdf  
70 Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Chapman DP, Giles WH, Anda RF. Childhood abuse, neglect, and household 
dysfunction and the risk of illicit drug use: the adverse childhood experiences study. Pediatrics. 2003 
Mar;111(3):564- 72. doi: 10.1542/peds.111.3.564. PMID: 12612237  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  130  
71 Rothman, E. F., Edwards, E. M., Heeren, T., & Hingson, R. W. (2008). Adverse childhood experiences predict 
earlier age of drinking onset: results from a representative US sample of current or former drinkers. 
Pediatrics 122(2), e298–e304. 
72 Forster, M., Gower, A. L., Borowsky, I. W., & McMorris, B. J. (2017). Associations between adverse childhood 
experiences, student -teacher relationships, and non -medical use of prescription medications among 
adolescents. Addictive Behaviors 68, 30–34. doi :10.1016/j.addbeh.2017.01.004 
73 Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents. A Research- Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and 
Community Leaders. Second Edition. National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH Publication No. 04- 4212(A). Second Edition October 
2003. Accessed July 23, 2021. https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/preventingdruguse_2.pdf
  
74 Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Childhood: A Research- Based Guide. National Institute on 
Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. March 2016. Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/early_childhood_prevention_march_2016.pdf
   
75 Hawkins J, Catalano R, Miller J. Risk and Protective Factors for Alcoh ol and Other Drug Problems in 
Adolescence and Early Adulthood: Implications for Substance Abuse Prevention.  Psych. Bulletin. 1992: 
112(1)64- 105. PDF: Risk_and_Protective_Factors_for_Alcohol_20161117-21667-1i3ln4w- with-cover -
page- v2.pdf (d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net)  A ccessed September 1, 2021.  
76 There are 3 generally accepted categories of prevention: Universal prevention which focuses on an entire 
population (e.g., school or community) and is not directed at a specific risk group. Selective prevention 
interventions focus on those at higher -than-average risk for substance use.  And indicated prevention 
intervention concentrate on those already using or engaged in other high- risk behaviors to prevent heavy or 
chroni c use.  Source: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Fostering healthy 
mental, emotional, and Behavioral development in children and youth. The National Academies Press. 2019. doi:10.17226/25201  
77 Hill K, Bailey J, Steeger C, et al. Ou tcomes of Childhood Preventive Intervention Across 2 Generations - A 
Nonrandomized Controlled Trial. AMA Pediatr. 2020;174(8):764-771. 
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.1310 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2766307?utm_campaign=articlePDF&utm_me
dium=articlePDFlink&utm_source=articlePDF&utm_con tent=jamapediatrics.2020.1310 
78 Olds D, Henderson CR Jr, Cole R, et al. Long- term effects of nurse home visitation on children’s criminal and 
antisocial behavior: 15- year follow -up of a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 1998;280 (14):1238-
1244.doi:10.1001/jama.280.14.1238 
79 Kellam SG, Wang W, Mackenzie ACL, et al. The impact of the Good Behavior Game, a universal classroom -
based preventive intervention in first and second grades, on high- risk sexual behaviors, and drug abuse and 
dependence disorders into young adulthood. Prev Sci. 2014;15(suppl 1):S6- S18. doi:10.1007/s11121-012-
0296-z 
80 Reynolds AJ, Temple JA. Extended early childhood intervention and school achievement: age thirteen findings 
from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child Dev. 1998;69(1):231- 246. doi:10.1111/j. 1467-
8624.1998.tb06145.x https://srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-
8624.1998.tb06145.x?sid=nlm-percent3Apubmed  
81 Hill K, Bailey J, Steeger C, et al. Outcomes of Childhood Preventive Intervention Across 2 Generations - 
A Nonrandomized Controlled Trial. AMA Pediatr. 2020;174(8):764-771. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.1310 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2766307?utm_campaign=articlePDF&
utm_medium=articlePDFlink&utm_source=articlePDF&utm_content=jamapediatrics.2020.1310  
82 Hawkins J, Oesterle S, Brown E., et al. Youth problem behaviors 8 years after implementing the Communities 
That Care prevention system. A community- randomized trial. JAMA Pediatrics . 2014; 168(2),122-129.  
83 Spoth R, Trudeau L, Redmond C, et al. PROSPER Partnership Delivery System: Effects on Adolescent Conduct 
Problem Behavior Outcomes Through 6.5 Years Past Baseline. J Adolescence. 2015; Dec; 45: 44–55. 
Accessed July 23, 2021.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4674368/   
84 Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents. A Research- Based Guide for Parents, Educators, 
and Community Leaders. Second Edition. National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH Pu blication No. 04-4212(A). 
Second Edition October 2003. Accessed July 23, 2021. https://www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/preventingdruguse_2.pdf
 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  131  
85 Risk and protective factors for alcohol and other drug problems in adolescence and early adulthood: Implications  
for substance abuse prevention. By Hawkins, J. David,Catalano, Richard F.,Miller, Janet Y.  
Psychological Bulletin, Vol 112(1), Jul 1992, 64- 105. https://psycnet.apa.org/buy/1992-40647-001  
86 Spoth R, Trudeau L, Shin C, et al. Longitudinal Effects of Universal Preventive Intervention on Prescription Drug 
Misuse: Three Randomized Controlled Trials with Late Adolescents and Young Adults. American Journal 
of Public Health. March 8, 2013. Accessed July 23, 2021.  
https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/abs/10.2105/AJPH.2012.301209?prevSearch=spoth&searchHistoryKe
y=  
87 Compton W , Jones C , Baldwin GT , et al. Targeting Youth to Prevent Later Substance Use Disorder: An 
Underutilized Response to the US Opioid Crisis. American Journal of Public Health. 2019;109:2185- S189.  
88 A Guide to SAMHSA's Strategic Prevention Framework. Center for Substance Abuse Pr evention, Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2019. 
Accessed July 23, 2021. https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/20190620- samhsa -strategic -prevention-
framework -guide.pdf   
89 Mullany, B., Barlow, A., Neault, N. et al. The Family Spirit Trial for American Indian Teen Mothers and Their  
Children: CBPR Rationale, Design, Methods and Baseline Characteristics. Prev Sci 13, 504 –518 (2012). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-012-0277-2  
90 The nurse –family partnership: An evidence -based preventive intervention. David L. Olds. First published: 23  
February 2006 https://doi.org/10.1002/imhj.20077  
91 Compton W, Jones C, Baldwin G, et al. Targeting Youth to Prevent Later Substance Use Disorder: An 
Underutilized Response to the US Opioid Crisis. Am J Public Health. 2019 Jun;109(S3):S185-S189. 
Accessed November 2021. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31242006 / 
92 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Office of the Surgeon General, Facing Addiction in 
America: The Surgeon General’s Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health. Washington, DC: HHS, 
November 2016.  Accessed November 2021. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK424857/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK424857.pdf  
93 Miller T, Hendrie D. Substance Abuse Prevention Dollars and Cents: A Cost -Benefit Analysis.  2008. DHHS Pub. 
No. (SMA) 07 -4298. Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration.  Accessed July 23, 2021. https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/cost-
benefits -prevention.pdf   
94 Washington State Institute for Public Policy.  Too Good for Drugs Program Cost -Benefit Analysis. Accessed July 
27, 2021. http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/BenefitCost/Program/413  
95 Washington State Institute for Public Policy.  Life Skills Training. Accessed November 2021. 
https://www.wsipp.wa.gov/BenefitCost/Program/37  
96 Washington State Institute for Public Policy.  Good Behavior Game. Accessed November 2021. 
http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/BenefitCost/Program/82  
97 Spoth, Trudeau, Redmond, Shin, Greenberg, Feinberg, & Hyun (2015). PROSPER partnership delivery system:  
Effects on conduct problem behavior outcomes through 6.5 years past baseline. Journal of Adolescence, 45, 44-55. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4674368/  
98 Spoth, Redmond, Clair, Shin, Greenberg, & Feinberg (2011). Preventing substance misuse through community- 
university partnerships: Randomized controlled trial outcomes 4½ years past baseline. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 40(4), 440-447. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21406278 / 
99 Hawkins, J. David, Oesterle, Sabrina, Brown, Eric C., Abbott, Robert D., & Catalano, Richard F. (2014). Youth  
 problem behaviors 8 years after implementing the Communities That Care prevention system. A  
community -randomized trial. JAMA Pediatrics, 168(2), 122-129. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3946405/  
100 Spoth R, Redmond C, Shin C, Greenberg MT, Feinberg ME, Trudeau L. PROSPER delivery of universal  
preventive interventions with young adolescents: long- term effects on emerging adult substance misuse and 
associated risk behaviors. Psychol Med. 2017 Oct;47(13):2246- 2259. doi: 10.1017/S0033291717000691.  
Epub 2017 Apr 12. PMID: 28399955; PMCID: PMC5963524.  
101 ICF (2021). Drug- Free Communities Support Program National Cross -Site Evaluation End-of- Year 2020 Report.  
Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/08/FINAL_DFC- Eval-Report_2021_march12_508.pdf  
102 Substance Use and Associated Health Conditions throughout the Lifespan. Public Health Rev. 2014; 35(2).  
Accessed July 23, 2021. https://web -
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  132  
beta.archive.org/web/20150206061220/http://www.publichealthreviews.eu/upload/pdf_files/14/00_Schulte
_Hser.pdf  
103 American Academy of Pediatrics Substance Use Screening and Implementation Guide. 2015. Accessed July 23, 
2021. https://www.aap.org/en -us/Documents/substance_use_screening_implementation.pdf   
104 Screening for Unhealthy Drug Use: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA.  
2020;323(22):2301- 2309. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8020 Accessed February 17, 2022.  
105 Patnode CD, Perdue LA, Rushkin M, et al. Screening for Unhealthy Drug Use in Primary Care in Adolescents 
and Adults, Including Pregnant Persons: Updated Systematic Review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force [Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2020 Jun. (Evidence 
Synthesis, No. 186.) Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK558174/ , Accessed 
February 17, 2022.  
106 Baldwin JR, Ca spi A, Meehan AJ, Ambler A, Arseneault L, Fisher HL, Harrington H, Matthews T, Odgers CL,  
Poulton R, Ramrakha S, Moffitt TE, Danese A. Population vs Individual Prediction of Poor Health From Results of Adverse Childhood Experiences Screening. JAMA Pediatr. 2021 Apr 1;175(4):385- 393. doi: 
10.1001/jamapediatrics.2020.5602. PMID: 33492366; PMCID: PMC7835926.  
107 Anda RF, Porter LE, Brown DW. Inside the adverse childhood experience score: strengths, limitations, and 
misapplications. Am J Prev Med. 2020;59(2):293–295 
108 Love H, Schlitt J, Soleimanpour S, et al. Years of School -Based Health Care Growth And Expansion Health 
Affairs  2019;38, NO. 5 (2019): 755–764. Accessed July 23, 2021. 
https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/pdf/10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05472   
109 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (US); Office of the Surgeon General (US). Facing 
Addiction in America: The Surgeon General's Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health [Internet]. 
Washington (DC): US Department of Health and Human Services; 2016 Nov. Table 3.1, Risk Factors for 
Adolescent and Young Adult Substance Use. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK424850/table/ch3.t2/   
110 National Research Council (US), Institute of Medicine (US), and Transportation Research Board (US) Program 
Committee for a Workshop on Contributions from the Behavioral and Social Sciences in Reducing and 
Preventing Teen Motor Crashes. Preventing Teen Motor Crashes: Contributions from the Behavioral and 
Social Sciences: Workshop Report. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2007. 4, Strategies 
to Improve Safety.  Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9669/  
111 Anderko, L., Roffenbender, J. S., Goetzel, R. Z., Howard, J., Millard, F., Wildenhaus, K., Desantis, C., & 
Novelli, W. (2012). Promoting prevention through the affordable care act: workplace wellness. Preventing 
chronic disease , 9, E175. https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd9.120092  
112 SAMHSA. 2016. Promoting Wellness: A Guide to Community Action.  
https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/d7/priv/sma16 -4957.pdf  
113 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: Substance Misuse Prevention for Young Adults.  
Publication No. PEP19- PL-Guide- 1 Rockville, MD: National Mental Health and Substance Use Policy 
Laboratory. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2019.  
114 Planning Alcohol Interventions Using NIAAA’s College Aim Alcohol Intervention Ma trix. NIH Publication No. 
19-AA-8017. Updated December 2019.  
115 SAMHSA. 2021. 2020 NSDUH Detailed Tables (online). Available at https://www.samhsa.gov/data/report/2020-
nsduh- detailed -tables , accessed on April 9, 2022.  ( Table 1.1A).  
116 Commission on Combating Synthetic Opioid Trafficking Final Report, February 2022. Accessed on April, 4 
2022. https://www.rand.org/hsrd/hsoac/commission-combating-synthetic-opioid- trafficking.html  
117 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 202 0 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Accessed from 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/ , accessed on March 29, 2022.  
118 Yang, Lawrence H et al. “Stigma and substance use disorders: an international phenomenon.” Current opinion in 
psychiatry vol. 30,5 (2017): 378- 388. doi:10.1097/YCO.0000000000000351. 
119 Holly Hagan, James P McGough, Hanne Thiede, Sharon Hopkins, Jeffrey Duchin, E.Russell Alexander,  
Reduced injection frequency and increased entry and retention in drug treatment associated with needle -
exchange participation in Seattle drug injectors, Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, Volume 19, Issue 3, 2000, Pages 247- 252, ISSN 0740-5472, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0740-5472(00)00104-5
. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  133  
120 Kidorf M, King VL, Neufeld K, Pierce J,  Kolodner K, Brooner RK. Improving substance abuse treatment 
enrollment in community syringe exchangers. Addiction. 2009; 104:786–795. 
121 Open Society Foundations. Harm Reduction at Work: A GUIDE FOR ORGANIZATIONS EMPLOYING 
PEOPLE WHO USE DRUGS. Retrieved f rom https://www.opensocietyfoundations. 
org/uploads/170e646d- bcc0 -4370-96d7-7cf2822a1869/workharmreduction-20110314.pdf. 
122 Abdul- Quader, A.S., Feelemyer, J., Modi, S. et al. Effectiveness of Structural -Level Needle/Syringe  
Programs to Reduce HCV and HIV Infection Among People Who Inject Drugs: A Systematic Review. 
AIDS Behav 17, 2878–2892 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461-013-0593-y . Accessed 10/31/2021.  
123 Cost-effectiveness of syringe service programs, medications for opioid use disorder, and combination programs  
in hepatitis C harm reduction among opioid injection drug users: a public payer perspective using a 
decision tree Stephen C Ijioma, PharmD, BA; Vasco M Pontinha, MPharm, MA; David A H oldford, PhD, 
MS, BSPharm; and Norman V Carroll, PhD, MS, BSPharm. Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2021;27(2):137-46. Accessed 10 -31-21. 
124 Nicholas C. Peiper, Sarah Duhart Clarke, Louise B. Vincent, Dan Ciccarone, Alex H. Kral, Jon E. Zibbell,  
Fentanyl test strips as an opioid overdose prevention strategy: Findings from a syringe services program in 
the Southeastern United States, International Journal of Drug Policy, Volume 63, 2019, Pages 122-128, 
ISSN 0955-3959, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2018.08.007 . 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0955395918302135). 
125 Mahip Acharya, Divyan Chopra, Corey J. Hayes, Benjamin Teeter, Bradley C. Mart in, 
Cost-Effectiveness of Intranasal Naloxone Distribution to High- Risk Prescription Opioid Users,  
Value in Health, Volume 23, Issue 4, 2020, Pages 451- 460, ISSN 1098-3015, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2019.12.002 . 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098301519352192 ) 
126  Thakarar K, Rokas KE, Lucas FL, Powers S, Andrews E, et al. (2019) Mortality, morbidity, and cardiac surgery 
in Injection Drug Use (IDU) -associated versus non -IDU infective endocarditis: The need to expand 
substance  use disorder treatment and harm reducti on services. PLOS ONE 14(11): e0225460. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0225460 . 
127 Aronowitz, Shoshana V., Behrends, Czarina Navos, Lowenstein, Margaret, Schackman, Bruce R., Weiner, Janet  
(2021). Lowering the Barriers to Medication Treatment for People with Opioid Use Disorder: Evidence for 
a Low - Threshold Approach, The Center for Health Economics of Treatment Interventions for Substance 
Use Disorder, HCV, and HIV (CHERISH). Accessed Februa ry 9, 2022.    
128 Dita Broz, Neal Carnes, Johanna Chapin -Bardales, Don C. Des Jarlais, Senad Handanagic, Christopher M. Jones,  
R. Paul McClung, Alice K. Asher, Syringe Services Programs’ Role in Ending the HIV Epidemic in the 
U.S.: Why We Cannot Do It Without Them, American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Volume 61, Issue 
5, Supplement 1, 2021, Pages S118- S129, ISSN 0749-3797, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2021.05.044 . 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0749379721003895 ). 
129 See SSP locations and regional gaps at: SEP Locations: NASEN Directory . Available at  
https://www.nasen.org/map/ . Accessed on February 17, 2022.  
130 Bird, Sheila M., Parmar, Mahesh K. B., and Strang, John (2015). Take -home naloxone to prevent fatalities from  
opiate- overdose: Protocol for Scotland’s public health policy evaluation, and a new measure to assess 
impact. Informa Healthcare, Drugs Educ Prev Pol, 2015; 22(1): 66–76, Published by Taylor & Francis. 
DOI: 10.3109/09687637.2014.981509.  
131 New York State Department of Health. Medicaid Harm Reduction Services Benefit. Available at 
https://www.health.ny.gov/diseases/aids/consumers/prevention/medicaid_harm_reduction.htm#:~:text=The
%20federal%20Centers%20for%20Medicare%20and%20Medicaid%20Services,to%20offer%20reimburse
ment%20for%20specific%20Harm%20Reduction%20Services  P ublished 2018. Accessed September 2, 
2021. 
132 Javed, Z., Burk, K., Facente, S., Pegram, L., Ali, A. & Asher, A. (2020). Syringe Services Programs: A  
Technical Package of Effective Strategies and Approaches for Planning, Design, and Implementation. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease, Control and Prevention; 2020. Retrieved from 
Syringe Services Programs Technical  Package (cdc.gov).  
133 David P. Wilson, Braedon Donald, Andrew J. Shattock, David Wilson, Nicole Fraser -Hurt, The cost -
effectiveness of harm reduction, International Journal of Drug Policy, Volume 26, Supplement 1, 2015, 
Pages S5 -S11, ISSN 0955-3959, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2014.11.007 . 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0955395914003119 ). Accessed February 9, 2022.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  134  
134 New York State Department of Health. Drug User Health. health.ny.gov. Published 2021. Available at: 
https://www.health.ny.gov/diseases/aids/consumers/prevention/ . Accessed on September 2, 2021.  
135 Missouri Department of Health & Senior Services. MO Stays Safe - Safer Drug Use and Risk Reduction. 
health.mo.gov. Available at 
https://health.mo.gov/living/healthcondiseases/communicable/hivaids/saferdruguse.php . Accessed 
September 2, 2021.  
136 Washington State Health Care Authority. Washington State Hub and Spoke Project. hca.wa.gov. Available at 
https://www.hca.wa.gov/about- hca/behavioral -health -recovery/washington- state-hub- and-spoke- project  
Accessed on September 2, 2021.  
137 The White House. 2021.  National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United States 2022–2025. Washington, DC. 
Accessed February 9, 2022: National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United States 2022–2025 (hivgov-prod-
v3.s3.amazonaws.com) . 
116 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2020. Viral Hepatitis National Strategic Plan for the United 
States:  
A Roadmap to Elimination (2021–2025). Washington, DC. Accessed on October 31, 2021: Viral Hepatitis 
National Strategic Plan for the United States: A Roadmap to Elimination (2021 -2025) (hhs.gov) . 
139 Crowley, D., Delargy, I. A national model of remote care for assessing and providing opioid agonist treatment 
during the COVID -19 pandemic: a report. Harm Reduct J  17, 49 (2020). https://doi.org/10 . 1186/s12954-
020-00394-z . 
140 Aronowitz, Shoshana V., Behrends, Czarina Navos, Lowenstein, Margaret, Schackman, Bruce R., Weiner, Janet 
(2021). Lowering the Barriers to Medication Treatment for People with Opioid Use Disorder: Evidence for 
a Low - Threshold Approach, The Center for Health Economics of Treatment Interventions for Substance 
Use Disorder, HCV, and HIV (CHERISH). Accessed February 9, 2022.  
141 Burke, Mary A. and Sullivan, Riley and Carman, Katherine Grace and Wen, Hefei and Wharam, James and Yu, 
Hao, Who Gets Medication -assisted Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder, and Does It Reduce Overdose 
Risk? Evidence from the Rhode Island All -payer Claims Database (April 22, 2021). FRB of Boston 
Working Paper No. 21- 3, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3832267 . 
142 Carrieri MP, Amass L, Lucas GM, Vlahov D, Wodak A, Woody GE. Buprenorphine use: the international 
experience. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Dec 15;43 Suppl 4:S197- 215. doi: 10.1086/508184. PMID: 171093 07. 
143 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: Principles of Community- based Behavioral Health 
Services for Justice- involved Individuals: A Research- based Guide. HHS Publication No. SMA19-5097. 
Rockville, MD: Office of Policy, Planning, and Innovation. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services.  
144 LEAD - NC Harm Reduction Coalition (nchrc.org) . Accessed on February 25, 2022.  
145 Collins, S.E., Lonczak, H.S. & Clifasefi, S.L. Seattle’s law enforcement assisted diversion (LEAD): program 
effects on  criminal justice and legal system utilization and costs. J Exp Criminol 15, 201–211 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-019-09352-7 . 
146 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration:  Principles of Community -based Behavioral Health 
Services for Justice- involved Individuals: A Research- based Guide. HHS Publication No. SMA19-5097. 
Rockville, MD: Office of Policy, Planning, and Innovation. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services.  
147 Muk ku VK, Benson TG, Alam F, Richie WD, Bailey RK. Overview of substance use disorders and incarceration 
of african american males. Front Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 12;3:98. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00098. PMID: 23162480; PMCID: PMC3495267.  
148 Gross, S., R., Possley,  M., & Stephens, K. (2017). Race and Wrongful Convictions in the United States.  The 
National Registry of Exonerations, Newkirk Center for Science and Society. Available at 
http://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Documents/Race_and_Wrongful_Convictions.pdf . 
Accessed February 25, 2022.   
149 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: Principles of Community- based Behavioral Health  
Services for Justice -involved Individuals: A Research- based Guide. HHS Publication No. SMA19-5097. 
Rockville, MD: Office of Policy, Planning, and Innovation. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, 2019.  
150 TASC (Treatment Alternatives for Safe Communities). Specialized Case Management Model. 
https://www.tasc.org/TascBlog/images/documents/TASC -Clinical- Case -Mgt-Model.pdf . Published January 
2019. Accessed September 2, 2021.  
151 Elizabeth M. Oliva, Melissa L.D. Christopher, Daina Wells, Mark Bounthavong, Michael Harvey, Julianne  
 Himstreet, Thomas Emmendorfer, Michael Valentino, Mariano Franchi, Francine Goodman, Jodie A. 
Trafton, Opioid overdose education and naloxone distribution: Development of the Veterans Health 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  135  
Administration’s national program, Journal of the American Pharmacists Association, Volume 57, Issue 2, 
Supplement, 2017, Pages S168- S179.e4, ISSN 1544-3191. 
152 Carroll JJ, Green TC, Noonan RK. E vidence- Based Strategies for Preventing Opioid Overdose: What’s Working 
in the United States: An Introduction for Public Heath, Law Enforcement, Local Organizations, and Others 
Striving to Serve Their Community. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/pdf/pubs/2018-
evidence- based -strategies.pdf . f. Accessed on September 2, 2021.  
153 Ashford RD, Curtis B, Brown AM. Peer -delivered harm reduction and recovery support services: Initial 
evaluation from a hybrid recovery community drop- in center and syringe exchange program. Harm Reduct 
J. 2018;15(1). doi:10.1186/s12954-018- 0258- 2. Retrieved on September 2, 2021.  
154 David P. Wilson, Braedon Donald, Andrew J. Shattock, David Wilson, Nicole Fraser -Hurt,  
The cost -effectiveness of harm reduction, International Journal of Drug Policy, Volume 26, Supplement 1, 
2015, Pages S5- S11, ISSN 0955-3959, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2014.11.007 . 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0955395914003119 ). 
155 Chandler McClellan, Barrot H. Lambdin, Mir M. Ali, Ry an Mutter, Corey S. Davis, Eliza Wheeler, Michael 
Pemberton, Alex H. Kral, Opioid -overdose laws association with opioid use and overdose mortality,  
Addictive Behaviors, Volume 86, 2018, Pages 90- 95, ISSN 0306-4603.  
156 Schneider KE, Park JN, Allen ST, Weir BW, Sherman SG. Knowledge of Good Samaritan Laws and Beliefs 
About Arrests Among Persons Who Inject Drugs a Year After Policy Change in Baltimore, Maryland. Public Health Rep. 2020 May/Jun;135(3):393- 400. doi: 10.1177/0033354920915439. Epub 2020 Apr 7. 
PMID: 32264789; PMCID: PMC7238711.  
157 Bebinger M. Built for Counterterrorism, This High- Tech Machine Is Now Used To Detect Fentanyl. Kaiser 
Health News. https://khn.org/news/built-for-counterterrorism- this-high- tech-machine -is-now- used-to-
detect -fentanyl/ . Published December 4, 2019. Accessed September 2, 2021.  
158 PERF Daily Critical Issues Report: PAARI F entanyl test strip program and other strategies for reducing opioid 
overdoses. Available at https://paariusa.org/2021/03/19/perf- daily -critical -issues -report- paari -fentanyl -test-
strip-program- and-other -strategies -for-reducing-opioid-overdoses/ . Accessed on September 2, 2021.  
159 Sulley S, Ndanga M. Inpatient Opioid Use Disorder and Social Determinants of Health: A Nationwide Analysis 
of the National Inpatient Sample (2012- 2014 and 2016-2017). Cureus . 2020;12(11):e11311. Published 
2020 Nov 3. doi:10.7759/cureus.11311. Retrieved on September 2, 2021.  
160 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Ad ministration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/ . 
161 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance us e and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data/
. 
162 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data/
. 
163 Xia PF, Pan XF, Li Y, et al. Trends in Diagnosed and Undiagnosed Diabetes Among Adults in the U.S., 2005-
2016 [published online ahead of print, 2021 Jul 14]. D iabetes Care . 2021;dc211156. doi:10.2337/dc21-
1156.  
164 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H-56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data
.  
165 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Serv ices Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral He alth 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  136  
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data . 
166 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, 
Arlington, VA. American Psychiatric Association, 2013.  
167 Magill, Molly et al. “A meta -analysis of cognitive -behavioral therapy for alcohol or other drug use disorders: 
Treatment efficacy by contrast condition.” Journal of consulting and clinical psychology vol. 87,12 (2019): 
1093- 1105. doi:10.1037/ccp0000447  
168 Maisel, Natalya C et al. “Meta- analysis of naltrexone and acamprosate for treating alcohol use disorders: when 
are these medications most helpful?.” Addiction (Abingdon, England) vol. 108,2 (2013): 275-93. 
doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2012.04054.x 
169 Mattick, Richard P et al. “Buprenorphine maintenance versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid 
dependence.” The Cochrane database of systematic reviews ,2 CD002207. 6 Feb. 2014 , 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002207.pub4 
170 Bauer LK, Brody JK, León C, Baggett TP. Characteristics of Homeless Adults Who Died of Drug Overdose: A 
Retrospective Record Review. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2016;27(2):846-859. doi:10.1353/hpu.2016.0075 
171 Dark e S, Hall W. Heroin overdose: research and evidence- based intervention. J Urban Health. 2003;80(2):189-
200. doi:10.1093/jurban/jtg022  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.n ih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf   
172  Darke S, Hall W. Heroin overdose: research and evidence- based intervention. J Urban Health. 2003;80(2):189-
200. doi:10.1093/jurban/jtg022 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf
  
173  Darke S, Hall W. Heroin overdose: research and evidence- based intervention. J Urban Health. 2003;80(2):189-
200. doi:10.1093/jurban/jtg022 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf   
174 Strang J, McCambridge J, Best D, et al. Loss of tolerance and overdose mortality after inpatient opiate 
detoxification: follow up study. BMJ. 2003;326(7396):959- 960. doi:10.1136/bmj.326.7396.959  
175 Joudrey, P.J., Khan, M.R., Wang, E.A. et al.  A conceptual model for understanding post -release opioid -related 
overdose risk. Addict Sci Clin Pract 14, 17 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13722-019-0145-5  
176 Au VYO, Rosic T, Sanger N, et al. Factors associated with opioid overdose during medication- assisted treatment: 
How can we identify individuals at risk?. Harm Reduct J . 2021;18(1):71. Published 2021 Jul 8. 
doi:10.1186/s12954-021-00521-4  
177 Forati AM, Ghose R, Mantsch JR. Examining Opioid Overdose Deaths across Communities Defined by Racial 
Composition: a Multisca le Geographically Weighted Regression Approach [published online ahead of 
print, 2021 Jul 6]. J Urban Health. 2021;1- 12. doi:10.1007/s11524-021-00554-x  
178 Forati AM, Ghose R, Mantsch JR. Examining Opioid Overdose Deaths across Communities Defined by Racial 
Composition: a Multiscale Geographically Weighted Regression Approach [published online ahead of 
print, 2021 Jul 6]. J Urban Health. 2021;1- 12. doi:10.1007/s11524-021-00554-x  
 
180 Saloner B, Cook BL. Blacks and Hispanics Are Less Likely Than Whites To Comple te Addiction Treatment, 
Largely Due To Socioeconomic Factors.  Health Affairs . 2013;32(1):135-145. 
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0983  
181 Phillippi JC, Schulte R, Bonnet K, et al. Reproductive -Age Women's Experience of Accessing Treatment for 
Opioid Use Disorder: "We Don't Do That Here" [published online ahead of print, 2021 May 17]. Womens Health Issues. 2021;S1049-3867(21)00033- 5. doi:10. 1016/j.whi.2021.03.010 
182 Boeri M, Lamonica AK, Turner JM, Parker A, Murphy G, Boccone C. Barriers and Motivators to Opioid 
Treatment Among Suburban Women Who Are Pregnant and Mothers in Caregiver Roles. Front Psychol. 
2021;12:688429. Published 2021 Jul 1. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.688429 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8280285/pdf/fpsyg-12-688429.pdf  
183 Hyder A, Lee J, Dundon A, Southerland LT, All D, Hammond G, et al. (2021) Opioid Treatment Deserts: 
Concept development and application in a US Midwestern urban county. PLoS ONE 16(5): e0250324. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0250324  
184 Armoon B, SoleimanvandiAzar N, Rostami M, et al. Drug type and risk behaviors associated with non- fatal 
overdose among people who use drugs: a systematic review and meta -analysis [published online ahead of 
print, 2021 Jul 21]. J Addict Dis. 2021;1- 12. doi:10.1080/10550887.2021.1950262  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  137  
185 Lippold KM, Jones CM, Olsen EO, Giroir BP. Racial/Ethnic and Age Group Differences in Opioid and Synthetic 
Opioid–Involved Overdose Deaths Among Adults Aged ≥18 Years in Metropolitan Areas — United States, 
2015–2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2019;68:967–973. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6843a3external icon. 
186 Goedel WC, Shapiro A, Cerdá M, Tsai JW, Hadland SE, Marshall BDL. Association of Racial/Ethnic 
Segregation With Treatment Capacity for Opioid Use Disorder in Counties in the United States. JAMA 
Netw Open.  2020;3(4):e203711. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.3711 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2764663?result Click=3  
187 Haffajee RL, Lin LA, Bohnert ASB, Goldstick JE. Characteristics of US Counties With High Opioid Overdose 
Mortality and Low Capacity to Deliver Medications for Opioid Use Disorder. JAMA Netw Open . 
2019;2(6):e196373. Published 2019 Jun 5. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.6373  
188 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Medications for opioid use disorder save 
lives. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/25310   
189 Moore BA, Fiellin DA, Cutter CJ, et al. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Improves Treatment Outcomes for 
Prescription Opioid Users in Primary Care Buprenorphine Treatment. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2016;71:54-57. doi:10.1016/j.jsat .2016.08.016 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5119533/pdf/nihms-
814533.pdf   
190 Weiss RD, Potter JS, Fiellin DA, et al. Adjunctive counseling during brief and extended buprenorphine -naloxone 
treatment for prescription opioid dependence: a 2- phase randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2011;68(12):1238- 1246. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.121 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3470422/pdf/nihms307513.pdf  
191 Weiss RD, Potter JS, Fiellin DA, et al. Adjunctive counseling during brief and extended buprenorphine -naloxone 
treatment for prescription opioid dependence: a 2 -phase randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2011;68(12):1238- 1246. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.121  
192 Hall OT, Jordan A, Teater J, et al. Experiences of racial discrimination in the medical setting and associations 
with me dical mistrust and expectations of care among black patients seeking addiction treatment [published 
online ahead of print, 2021 Jun 25]. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2021;108551. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2021.108551 
193 van Boekel LC, Brouwers EPM, van Weeghel J, Garretsen HFL. Stigma among health professionals towards 
patients with substance use disorders and its consequences for healthcare delivery: Systematic review. Drug and Alcohol Dependence . 2013;131(1-2):23- 35. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.02.018  
194 Ellis K, Walter s S, Friedman SR, et al. Breaching Trust: A Qualitative Study of Healthcare Experiences of People 
Who Use Drugs in a Rural Setting. Front Sociol . 2020;5:593925. Published 2020 Nov 10. 
doi:10.3389/fsoc.2020.593925  
195 Howard KP, Altenburger EM, Cheavens JS. V alidation predicting premature drop -out from treatment provided in 
training clinics. Behav Cogn Psychother . 2020;48(1):116- 120. doi:10.1017/S1352465819000420  
196 Hoffman KA, Green CA, Ford JH 2nd, Wisdom JP, Gustafson DH, McCarty D. Improving quality of care  in 
substance abuse treatment using five key process improvement principles. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2012;39(3):234- 244. doi:10.1007/s11414-011-9270-y 
197 Howard KP, Altenburger EM, Cheavens JS. Validation predicting premature drop- out from treatment provided in 
training clinics. Behav Cogn Psychother . 2020;48(1):116- 120. doi:10.1017/S1352465819000420  
198 Hoffman KA, Green CA, Ford JH 2nd, Wisdom JP, Gustafson DH, McCarty D. Improving quality of care in 
substance abuse treatment using five key process improvement principles. J Behav Health Serv Res. 
2012;39(3):234- 244. doi:10.1007/s11414-011-9270-y 
199 Natio nal Academy of Engineering (US) and Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Engineering and the 
Health Care System; Reid PP, Compton WD, Grossman JH, et al., editors. Building a Better Delivery 
System: A New Engineering/Health Care Partnership. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 
2005. Crossing the Quality Chasm. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK22857/  
200 Corrigan, P.W., Kuwabara, SA., O’Shaughnessy, J. (2009). The public stigma of mental illness and druaddiction: 
findings from a stratified random sample. Journal of Social Work. (9)(2): 139-147. 
201 Barry, C.L., McGinty, E.E., Pescosolido, B.A., Goldman, H.H. (2014).  Stigma, discrimination, treatment, 
effectiveness, an d policy: public views about drug addiction and mental illness.  Psychiatric Services. 
(65)(10): 1269-1272. 
202 Kelly, J.F., Westerhoff, C.M. (2010). Does it matter how we refer to individuals with substance -related 
conditions? A randomized study of two commonly used terms.  International Journal of Drug Policy. 
21(3):202-7. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  138  
203 Choi NG, DiNitto DM, Marti CN, Choi BY. Association of adverse childhood experiences with lifetime mental 
and substance use disorders among men and women aged 50+ years.  Int Psychogeriatr . 2017;29(3):359-
372. doi: 10.1017/S1041610216001800   
204 US Preventive Services Task Force. Unhealthy Drug Use: Screening: Final Recommendation Statement.  
 https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/drug- use-illicit -screening .  
Accessed on April 18, 2022.  
205 White House. State o f the Union Address, March 1, 2022.  https://www.whitehouse.gov/state -of-the-union-2022/ . 
Accessed April 18, 2022.  
206 Johnston DC, Mathews WD, Maus A, Gustafson DH. Using Smartphones to Imp rove Treatment Retention 
Among Impoverished Substance -Using Appalachian Women: A Naturalistic Study. Subst Abuse . 
2019;13:1178221819861377. Published 2019 Jul 8. doi:10.1177/1178221819861377  
207 Milby JB, Schumacher JE, McNamara C, et al. Initiating abstinen ce in cocaine abusing dually diagnosed 
homeless persons. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2000;60(1):55- 67. doi:10.1016/s0376-8716(99)00139-8 
208 Frazer Z, McConnell K, Jansson LM. Treatment for substance use disorders in pregnant women: Motivators and 
barriers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2019;205:107652. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2019.107652  
209 Socías ME, Volkow N, Wood E. Adopting the 'cascade of care' framework: an opportunity to close the 
implementation gap in addiction care?. Addiction. 2016;111(12):2079- 2081. doi:10.1111/add.13479 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5321168/pdf/nihms-850611.pdf  
210 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication  No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data
 
211 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Key substance use and mental health 
indicators in the United States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS 
Publication No. PEP21-07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H-56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data
 
212 Gerbert B., Berg -Smith S., Mancuso M., Caspers N., McPhee S., Null D., Wofsy J. Using innovative video 
doctor technology in primary care to deliver brief smoking and alcohol intervention. Health Promot. Pract. 
2003;4(3):249–261.  
213 Shingleton R.M., Palfai T.P. Technology- delivered adaptations of motivational interviewing for health- related 
behaviors: a systematic review of the current research. Patient Educ. Couns. 2016;99(1):17 –35.  
214 Dugosh K, Abraham A, Seymour B, McLoyd K, Chalk M, Festinger D. A Systematic Review on the Use of 
Psychosocial Interventions in Conjunction With Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Addiction. Journal of Addiction Medicine. 2016;10(2):93- 103. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000193  
215 Petry NM, Peirce JM, Stitzer ML, Blaine J, Roll JM, Cohen A, et al. Effect of prize- based incentives on 
outcomes in stimulant abusers in outpatient psychosocial treatment programs: A national drug abuse 
treatment clinical trials network study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005. ; 62:1148 -56. 
216 Rawson R, Glasner S, Brecht ML, Farabee D. A randomized comparison of 4 vs. 16 weeks of psychosocial 
treatment for stimulant users. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2021;124:108274. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2020.108274  
217 Kiluk BD, Nich C, Buck MB, et al. Randomize d Clinical Trial of Computerized and Clinician -Delivered CBT in 
Comparison With Standard Outpatient Treatment for Substance Use Disorders: Primary Within- Treatment 
and Follow -Up Outcomes. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;175(9):853- 863. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.17090978 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6120780/pdf/nihms970623.pdf   
218 Sordo, Barrio, Bravo, Indave, Degenhardt, Wiessing, Ferri, Pastor -Barriuso, Mortality Risk During and After 
Opioid Substitution Treatment: Systematic Review and Meta -analysis of Cohort Studies (Apr. 2017), 
available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5421454/  
219 Weiss RD, Potter JS, Fiellin DA, et al. Adjunctive counseling during brief and extended buprenorphine -naloxone 
treatment for prescri ption opioid dependence: a 2- phase randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2011;68(12):1238- 1246. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.121  
220 Campbell ND, Lovell AM. The history of the development of buprenorphine as an addiction therapeutic. Ann N 
Y Acad Sci. 2012;1248:124- 139. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06352.x 
221 Luderer H,  Chiodo L,  Wilson A,  Brezing C,  Martinez S,  Xiong X,  Gerwien R,  Imbert B,  Deeg M,  Maricich  
Y, Campbell A , Patient Engagement With a Game -Based Digital Therapeutic for the Treatment of Opioid 
Use Disorder: Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Open- Label, Decentralized Trial  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  139  
JMIR Res Protoc 2022;11(1):e32759  
doi: 10.2196/32759  
222 Kravitz -Wirtz N, Davis CS, Ponicki WR, et al . Association of Medicaid Expansion With Opioid Overdose 
Mortality in the United States. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(1):e1919066. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.19066 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2758476  
223 United States Government Accountability Office, States' Changes to Payment Rates for Substance Use Disorder  
Services, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-20-260.pdf , accessed on March 3. 2022.  
224 Mark TL, Olesiuk W, Ali MM, Sherman LJ, Mutter R, Teich JL. Differential Reimbursement of Psychiatric 
Services by Psychiatrists and Other Medical Providers. Psychiatr Serv. 2018;69(3):281-285. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ps.201700271  
225 Strang J, McCambridge  J, Best  D, et al. Loss of tolerance and overdose mortality after inpatient opiate 
detoxification: follow up study. BMJ . 2003;326(7396):959- 960. doi:10.1136/bmj.326.7396.959 
https://ww w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC153851/pdf/959.pdf   
226 Carter, J., Zevin, B. & Lum, P.J. Low barrier buprenorphine treatment for persons experiencing homelessness 
and injecting heroin in San Francisco. Addict Sci Clin Pract 14, 20 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13722-
019-0149-1  
227 Strike, C., Millson, M., Hopkins, S., & Smith, C. (2013). What is low threshold methadone maintenance 
treatment?. The International journal on drug policy, 24(6), e51–e5 6. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.05.005  
228 (66 FR 4076) 01/17/2001 Opioid Drugs in Maintenance and Detoxification Treatment of Opiate Addiction 
Services. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2001-03-19/pdf/01-6745.pdf   
229 Motivans, M. (2021) Federal Justice Statistics 2017- 2018. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, 
Bureau of Justice Statistics. https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/fjs1718.pdf  
230 Ellis K, Walters S, Friedman SR, et al. Breaching Trust: A Qualitative Study of Healthcare Experiences of People 
Who Use Drugs in a Rural Setting. Front Sociol . 2020;5:593925. Published 2020 Nov 10. 
doi:10.3389/fsoc.2020.593925  
231 Proulx D, Fantasia HC.  The Lived Experience of Postpartum Women Attending Outpatient Substance Treatment 
for Opioid or Heroin Use. J Midwifery Womens Health. 2021;66(2):211- 217. doi:10.1111/jmwh.13165 
232 Laura J. Faherty, MD, MPH, MS ; Ashley M. Kranz, PhD ; Joshua Russell -Fritch, MS ; Stephen  W. Patrick,  MD, 
MPH,  MS; Jonathan Cantor, PhD ; Bradley  D. Stein,  MD, PhD , Association of Punitive and Reporting State 
Policies Related to Substance Use in Pregnancy With Rates of Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome, JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(11):e1914078. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.14078. Accessed May 5, 2022  
233 Proulx D, Fantasia HC. The Lived Experience of Postpartum Women Attending Outpatient Substance Treatment 
for Opioid or Heroin Use. J Midwifery Womens Health. 2021;66(2):211- 217. doi:10.1111/jmwh.13165 
234 86 FR 3386. Final Rule. Registration Requirements for Narcotic Treatment Programs With Mobile Components. 
Available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-06-28/pdf/2021-13519.pdf  
235 Sugarman OK, Bachhuber MA, Wennerstrom A, Bruno T, Springgate BF (2020) Interventions for incarcerated 
adults with opioid use disorder in the United States: A systematic review with a focus on social 
determinants of health. PLoS ONE 15(1): e0227968. https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0227968.  
236 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, National Center 
for Health Workforce Analysis. State- Level Projections of Supply and Demand for Behavioral Health 
Occupations: 2016- 2030, Rockville, Maryland, http s://bhw.hrsa.gov/sites/default/files/bureau -health -
workforce/data- research/state -level -estimates -report -2018.pdf ,  2018, accessed May 25, 2021.  
237 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration. Behavioral 
health workforce projections, 2017- 2030: HRSA health workforce factsheet. Rockville, MD. Accessed at  
https://bhw.hrsa.gov/sites/ default/files/bureau -health -workforce/data- research/bh -workforce-projections-
fact-sheet.pdf , 2020, a ccessed May 25. 2021.  
238 Ma, A., Sanchez, A., & Ma, M.  The Impact of Patient -Provider Race/Ethnicity Concordance on Provider Visits: 
Updated Evidence from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Journal of racial and ethnic health 
disparities, 6(5), 1011–1020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40615-019-00602-y , 2019,  accessed May 25, 2021.  
239 Ma, A., Sanchez, A., & Ma, M. The Impact of Patient -Provider Race/Ethnicity Concordance on Provider Visits: 
Updated Evidence from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Journal of racial and ethnic health 
disparities , 6(5), 1011–1020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40615-019-00602-y , 2019, accessed May 25, 2021.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  140  
240 Biancarelli , D. , et.al., Strategies used by people who inject drugs to avoid stigma in healthcare settings, 2019, 
Drug Alcohol Depen. 2019 , https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6521691/pdf/nihms-
1524548.pdf   
241 Biancarelli , D. , et.al., Strategies used by people who inject drugs to avoid stigma in healthcare settings, 2019 , 
Drug Alcohol Depen. 2019 , https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6521691/pdf/nihms-
1524548.pdf   
242 Adams, J., Volkow, N. , Ethical imperatives to Overcome Stigma Against People with substance Use Disorders, 
Journal of Ethics , American Medical Association, 2020,  https://journalofethics.ama -
assn.org/article/ethical -imperatives -overcome- stigma -against -people- substance -use-disorders/2020- 08  
243 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Health 
Professional Shortage Areas for Mental Health map , HRSA provided directly May 27,2021.  
244 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General, Disparities Affect Access to 
Buprenorphine Services for Opioid Use Disorder, https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-12-17-00240.asp , 
accessed May 25, 2021.  
245 Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Prisoner Statistics, 1989 -2019; and U.S. Census Bureau, post -
censal resident population estimates for January 1 of the following calendar year  
246 Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics, Annual Survey of Jails, 2006- 2018; and Census of Jails, 2005 and 2019 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/ji19_sum.pdf   
247 National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse: Behind Bars II: Substance Abuse and America’s Prison 
Population, 2010, https://issuu.com/nibbana/docs/5313_behind- bars-ii  
248 Hodgkin D, Horgan C, Bart G. Financial sustainability of payment models for office -based opioid treatment in 
outpatient clinics. Addict Sci Clin Pract. 2021;16(1):45. Published 2021 Jul 5. doi:10.1186/s 13722-021-
00253-7 
249 Haffajee RL, Bohnert ASD, Lagisetty PA.  Policy Pathways to Address Provider Workforce Barriers to 
Buprenorphine Treatment, Am J Prev Med. 2018 Jun; 54(6 Suppl 3): S230–S242..doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2017.12.022 . 
250 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. SAMHSA’s Working Definition of Recovery. 
2010. Retrieved by ONDCP on May 24, 2021 at https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/d7/priv/pep12 -
recdef.pdf   
251 Granfield R, Cloud W. Coming clean: overcoming addiction without treatment. New York University Press, New 
York. 1999.  
252 Hennessy EA. Recovery capital: a systematic revi ew of the literature. Addiction Research & Theory. 
2017;25(5):349-360. 
253 Sahker E, Ali S, Arndt S. Employment recovery capital in the treatment of substance use disorders: Six-month 
follow- up observations. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2019;205:107624. 
254 Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. (2021). Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health: Detailed tables. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.gov/data/, 2021:1062-63 . (Tables 6.37A to 6.37B)  
255 Kelly JF, Bergman B, Hoeppner BB, Vilsaint C, White WL. Prevalence and pathways of recovery from drug and 
alcohol problems in the United States population: Implications for practice, research, and policy. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2017;181:162-169. 
256 Kelly JF, Stout RL, Jason LA, Fallah- Sohy N, Hoffman LA, Hoeppner BB. One -Stop Shopping for Recovery: 
An Investigation of Participant Characteristics and Benefits Derived From U.S. Recovery Community 
Centers. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2020;44(3):711-721.  
257 Kelly JF, Stout RL, Jason LA, Fallah- Sohy N, Hoffman LA, Hoeppner BB. One -Stop Shopping for Recovery: 
An Investigation of Participant Characteristics and Benefits Derived From U.S. Recovery Community 
Centers. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2020;44(3):711-721. 
258 Ryan JP, Victor BG, Moore A, Mowbray O, Perron BE. Recovery coaches and the stability of reunification for 
substance abusing families in child welfa re. Children and Youth Services Review. 2016;70:357-363. 
259 Andreas D, Ja DY, Wilson S. Peers Reach Out Supporting Peers to Embrace Recovery (PROSPER): A Center for 
Substance Abuse Treatment Recovery Community Services Program. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterl y. 
2010;28(3):326-338. 
260 Deering KN, Kerr T, Tyndall MW, et al. A peer -led mobile outreach program and increased utilization of 
detoxification and residential drug treatment among female sex workers who use drugs in a Canadian setting. Drug Alcohol Depend.  2011;113(1):46-54. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  141  
261 Tracy K, Burton M, Nich C, Rounsaville BJ. Utilizing Peer Mentorship to Engage High Recidivism Substance -
Abusing Patients in Treatment. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. 2011;37:525 - 531. 
262 Boisvert RA, Martin LM, Grose k M, Clarie AJ. Effectiveness of a peer -support community in addiction 
recovery: participation as intervention. Occupational therapy international. 2008;15(4):205-220. 
263 Reif S, Braude L, Lyman DR, et al. Peer recovery support for individuals with substanc e use disorders: assessing 
the evidence. Psychiatric services (Washington, DC). 2014;65(7):853-861. 
264 Sanders LM, Trinh C, Sherman BR, Banks SM. Assessment of client satisfaction in a peer counseling substance 
abuse treatment program for pregnant and postpartum women. Evaluation and Program Planning. 
1998;21(3):287-296. 
265 Valentine P, White, W.L., Taylor, P. The Recovery Community Organization: Toward A Working Definition and 
Description. Connecticut Community for Addiction Recovery. 2007. Retrieved by ONDCP on June 28, 
2021 at: https://facesandvoicesofrecovery.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/The- Recovery -Community-
Organization -Toward -A-Working- Definition -and-Desc ription.pdf   
266 Valentine, P. Peer -Based Recovery Support Services Within a Recovery Community Organization: The CCAR 
Experience. In: Kelly J., White W. (eds) Addiction Recovery Management. Current Clinical Psychiatry. 
2010. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-960-4_14  
267 Best D. Addiction Recovery: A movement for social change and personal growth in the UK.  Brighton, UK: 
Pavilion Publishing (Brighton) Ltd; 2012.  
268 Associat ion of Recovery in Higher Education (ARHE). Collegiate recovery programs. ARHE website. 2021. 
https://collegiaterecovery.org/crps- crcs 
269 Laudet, A.; Harris, K.; Winters, K.; Moberg, P.; Kimball, T. Nationwide survey of collegiate recovery programs: 
Is there a single model?; Paper presented at the 75th Annual Meeting - College on Problems of Drug 
Dependence; San Diego, CA. 2013;  
270 Laudet AB , Harris K, Kimball T, Winters KC, Moberg DP. Characteristics of students participating in collegiate 
recovery programs: a national survey. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 2015;51:38-46. 
271 Laudet AB, Harris K, Kimball T, Winters KC, Moberg DP. In col lege and in recovery: Reasons for joining a 
Collegiate Recovery Program. Journal of American college health: J of ACH. 2016;64(3):238-246. 
272 Harris KS, Baker AK, Kimball TG, Shumway ST. Achieving Systems -Based Sustained Recovery: A 
Comprehensive Model for Collegiate Recovery Communities. Journal of Groups in Addiction & Recovery. 2008;2(2-4):220-237. 
273 Laudet AB, Harris K, Kimball T, Winters KC, Moberg DP. In college and in recovery: Reasons for joining a 
Collegiate Recovery Program. Journal of American college health: J of ACH. 2016;64(3):238-246. 
274 Laudet AB, Harris K, Kimball T, Winters KC, Moberg DP. Characteristics of students participating in collegiate 
recovery programs: a national survey. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 2015;51:38-46. 
275 Cleveland HH, Harris KS, Baker AK, Herbert R, Dean LR. Characteristics of a collegiate recovery community: 
maintaining recovery in an abstinence -hostile environment. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2007;33(1):13-23. 
276 Association of Recovery in Higher Education. Find a school. ARS website. 2021: Retried by ONDCP on May 
27. 2021 at: https://recoveryschools.org/find-a-school/  
277 Finch AJ, Moberg DP, Krupp AL. Continuing Care in High Schools: A Descriptive Study of Recovery High 
School Programs. J Child Adolesc Subst Abuse. 2014;23(2):116-129. 
278 Tanner -Smith EE, Finch AJ, Hennessy EA, Moberg DP. Who attends recovery high schools after substance use 
treatment? A descriptive analysis of school aged youth. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2018;89:20-27. 
279 Moberg DP, Finch AJ. Recovery high schools: A descriptive study of school programs and students.  
 J Groups Addict Recover . 2008;2:128-161. 
280 Finch AJ, Moberg DP, Krupp AL. Continuing Care in High Schools: A Descriptive Study of Recovery High 
School Programs. J Child Adolesc Subst Abuse. 2014;23(2):116-129. 
281 Weimer DL, Moberg P, French F, Tanner -Smith EE, Finch AJ. Net Benefits of Recovery High Schools: Higher 
Cost but Increased Sobriety and Educational Attainment. The journal of mental health policy and 
economics. 2019;22(3):109-120. 
282 Oser R, Karakos HL, Hennessy EA. Disparities in Youth Access to Substance Abuse Treatment and Recovery 
Services: How One Recovery School Initiative is Helping Students “Change Tracks”. Journal of Groups in 
Addiction & Recovery. 2016;11(4):267-281. 
283 Glaude M, Torres LR. Hispanic Perspectives on Recovery High Schools: If We Build Them, Will They Come? 
Journal of groups in addiction & recovery. 2016;11(4):240-249. 
284 Finch, A, Recovery High Schools Growth Char t: 1979- 2021. Association of Recovery Schools. Retrieved by 
ONDCP on. August 18, 2021at https://recoveryschools.org/rhs-growth- chart/   
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  142  
285 Nash A, Collier C. The Alternative Peer Group: A Developmentally Appropriate Recovery Support Model for 
Adolescents. Journal of addictions nursing. 2016;27(2):109-119. 
286 Smith NZ, Vasquez PJ, Emelogu NA, Hayes AE, Engebretson J, Nash AJ. The Good, the Bad, and Recovery: 
Adolescents Describe the Advantages and Disadvantages of Alternative Peer Groups. Substance Abuse: 
Research and Treatment. 2020;14:1178221820909354. 
287 Jason LA, Wiedbusch E, Bobak TJ, Taullahu D. Estimating the Number of Substance Use Disor der Recovery 
Homes in the United States. Alcoholism treatment quarterly. 2020;38(4):506-514. 
288 Jason LA, Davis MI, Ferrari JR. The need for substance abuse after -care: longitudinal analysis of Oxford House. 
Addict Behav. 2007;32(4):803-818. 
289 Polcin DL, Ko rcha RA, Bond J, Galloway G. Sober living houses for alcohol and drug dependence: 18-month 
outcomes. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 2010;38(4):356-365. 
290 Tuten M, DeFulio A, Jones HE, Stitzer M. Abstinence -contingent recovery housing and reinforceme nt-based 
treatment following opioid detoxification. Addiction. 2012;107(5):973-982. 
291 Tuten M, Shadur JM, Stitzer M, Jones HE. A Comparison of Reinforcement Based Treatment (RBT) versus RBT 
plus Recovery Housing (RBT(RH)). J Subst Abuse Treat. 2017;72:48-55. 
292 Hatzenbuehler ML. Structural stigma: Research evidence and implications for psychological science. The 
American psychologist. 2016;71(8):742-751. 
293 Browne T, Priester MA, Clone S, Iachini A, Dehart D, Hock R. Barriers and facilitators to substance use 
treatment in the rural south: a qualitative study. J Rural Health. 2016;32(1):92–101. 
294 Copeland J. A qualitative study of barriers to formal treatment among women who self -managed change in 
addictive behaviours. J Subst Abuse Treat . 1997;14(2):183–190. 
295 Cellucci T, Krogh J, Vik P. Help seeking for alcohol problems in a college population. J Gen Psychol . 
2006;133(4):421–433. 
296 Legislative Analysis and Public Policy Association. Model Recovery Residence Certification Act. 2021: 
Retrieved by ONDCP on May 28, 2021 at https://legislativeanalysis.org/model- recovery -residence-
certification -act/.  
297 Volkow N. To End the Drug Crisis, Bring Addiction Out of the Shadows. In AAMC News, November 8, 2021.  
298 Kelly JF, Westerhoff CM. Does it matter how we refer to  individuals with substance -related conditions? A 
randomized study of two commonly used terms. Int J Drug Policy. 2010;21(3):202-207. 
299 Kelly JF, Dow SJ, Westerhoff C. Does Our Choice of Substance -Related Terms Influence Perceptions of 
Treatment Need? An E mpirical Investigation with Two Commonly Used Terms. Journal of Drug Issues. 
2010;40(4):805-818. 
300 Ashford RD, Brown AM, Curtis B. Substance use, recovery, and linguistics: The impact of word choice on 
explicit and implicit bias. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018;189:131-138. 
301 Ashford RD, Brown AM, McDaniel J, Curtis B. Biased labels: An experimental study of language and stigma 
among individuals in recovery and health professionals. Substance use & misuse. 2019;54(8):1376-1384. 
302 Barry CL, McGinty EE, Pescosolido B, Goldman HH. Stigma, Discrimination, Treatment Effectiveness and 
Policy Support: Comparing Public Views about Drug Addiction with Mental Illness. Psychiatric services (Washington, DC). 2014;65(10):1269-1272. 
303 van Boekel LC, Brouwers EPM, van Weeghel J, Garretsen HFL. Stigma among health professionals towards 
patients with substance use disorders and its consequences for healthcare delivery: Systematic review. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2013;131(1):23- 35. 
304 Benuto LT, Casas J, Gonzalez F, Newlands R. The Behavioral Model of Health: Education, Behavioral Health 
Factors, and Stigma as Predictors of Help -Seeking Attitudes. Community Mental Health Journal. 
2020;56(7):1275-1283. 
305 Kennedy- Hendricks A, Barry CL, Gollust SE, Ensminger ME, Chisolm MS, McGinty EE. Social Stigma Toward 
Persons With Prescription Opioid Use Disorder: Associations With Public Support for Punitive and Public Health -Oriented Policies. Psychiatric services (Washington, DC). 2017;68(5):462-469. 
306 McGinty  EE, Stone EM, Kennedy- Hendricks A, Barry CL. Stigmatizing language in news media coverage of the 
opioid epidemic: Implications for public health. Preventive Medicine. 2019;124:110-114. 
307 McGinty EE, Kennedy- Hendricks A, Baller J, Niederdeppe J, Gollust S,  Barry CL. Criminal Activity or 
Treatable Health Condition? News Media Framing of Opioid Analgesic Abuse in the United States, 1998-
2012. Psychiatric services (Washington, DC). 2016;67(4):405-411. 
308 Walton MT, Hall MT. The Effects of Employment Interventio ns on Addiction Treatment Outcomes: A Review 
of the Literature. Journal of Social Work Practice in the Addictions. 2016;16(4):358-384. 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  143  
309 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Key substance use and mental health indicators in 
the United  States: Results from the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. 
PEP21 -07-01- 003, NSDUH Series H- 56). 2021. Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health Statistics 
and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administrat ion. Retrieved from 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/  
310 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Collateral Consequences: The Crossroads of Punishment, Redemption, and the 
Effects on Communities. In. Washington, DC, 2019.  
311 The International Classification of Diseases, Version 10 (ICD -10) was implemented in 1999 following 
conventions defined by the World Health Organization to replace Version 9 (ICD -9), in use since 1979.  
312 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National  Center for Health Statistics. Multiple Cause of Death, 1999 -
2019 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released December 2020. Extracted by ONDCP from 
http://wonder.cdc.gov/mcd-icd10.html  on December 22, 2020.  
313 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Statistics Rapid Release: 
Provisional Drug Overdose Death Counts. Available at https://www .cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/drug-overdose-
data.htm , Accessed on November 19, 2021.  
314 National HIDTA Program Office.  The Overdose Response Strategy Annual Report. 2019.  Available at 
https://ww w.hidtaprogram.org/pdf/ors_report_2019.pdf . Accessed on August 23, 2021.  
315 National Park Service, Dangerous Marijuana Grow Site Discovered in Jail Canyon.; 2021. Available at:  
https://www.nps.gov/deva/learn/news/dangerous- marijuana -grow- site-discovered -in-jail-canyon.htm . 
Accessed July 22, 2021.  
316 Thorsen, Kim.  Exploring the Problem of Domestic Marijuana Cultivation.  Statement for the Record, U.S. Senate 
Caucus on International Narcotics Control.  Available at 
https://www.doi.gov/ocl/hearings/112/MarijuanaCultivation_120711 . Accessed August 23, 2021.  
317 Thorsen, Kim.  Exploring the Problem of Domestic Marijuana Cultivation.  Statement for the Record, U.S. Senate 
Caucus on International Narcotics Control.  Available at 
https://www.doi.gov/ocl/hearings/112/MarijuanaCultivation_120711 . Accessed August 23, 2021.  
318 May C. Transnational Crime and the Developing World. Global Financial Integrity, March 2017.  Accessed 
August 19, 2021. https://secureservercdn.net/45.40.149.159/34n.8bd.myftpupload.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/Transnational_Crime-final.pdf?time=1629315967. 
319 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008- 21: 2.  
320320 U.S. Department of Justice Dru g Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008- 21: 2.  
321 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008- 21: 17.  
322 Counternarcotic s Center. 2019 Global Cocaine Trafficking (sanitized). 2019; 1911- 23987: 8.  
323 The White House.  National Strategy to Combat Transnational Organized Crime. July 2011.  Available at 
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/Strategy_to_Combat_Transnational_Organized_Cr
ime_July_2011.pdf . A ccessed on August 23, 2021.  
324 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Ad ministration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008-21. 
325 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.  Alternative Development: A Global Thematic Evaluation Final 
Synthesis Report.  2005. Available at 
https://www.unodc.org/pdf/Alternative_Development_Evaluation_Dec-05.pdf . Accessed on August 23, 
2021. 
326 U.S. International Development Finance Corporation.  United States – Colombia Growth Initiative Executive 
Summary: A Bilateral Investment Initiative to Advance Rural Development and Realize a Drug Free Colombia. Available at 
https://www.dfc.gov/sites/default/files/media/documents/USCGI%20Executive%20Summary.pdf
. 
Accessed on August 31, 2021.  
327 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008-21. 
328 Library of Congress. Mexico: Amendment Reforming National Security Law Approved. January 25, 2021. 
Available at Mexico: Amendment Reforming National Security Law Approved | Library of Congress 
(loc.gov) . Accessed on August 13, 2021.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  144  
329 Adriana Ávila -Zúñiga- Nordfjeld, Dimitrios Dalaklis. CHAPTER 3 - Enhancing Maritime Security in Mexico: 
Privatization, Militarization, or a combination of bo th? Available from https://hal.archives -ouvertes.fr/hal-
01792131/document . A ccessed on August 22, 2021.  
330 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008-21. 
331 The White House.  UPDATED: ONDCP Releases Data on Coca Cultivation and Potential Cocaine Production in 
the Andean Region.  July 16, 2021.  Available at  https://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/briefing-
room/2021/07/16/ondcp- releases -data-on-coca-cultivation -and-potential- cocaine-production- in-the-andean -
region/ . A ccessed on August 23, 2021.  
332 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.  Colombia Coca Cultivation Survey, 2020.  
https://www .unodc.org/documents/crop-
monitoring/Colombia/Colombia_2020_Coca_Survey_FactSheet_ExSum.pdf . A ccessed on August 25, 
2021. 
333 U.S. Department of State.  2020 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Volume 1. Drug and Chemical 
Control. March 2021:  33. Available at https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/International-
Narcotics -Control- Strategy -Report-Volume-I- FINAL -1.pdf . A ccessed August 23, 2021.  
334 U.S. Department of State.  2020 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Volume 1. Drug and Chemical 
Control. March 2021:  130. Available at https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/International-
Narcotics -Control- Strategy -Report-Volume-I- FINAL -1.pdf . A cces sed August 23, 2021.  
335 U.S. Department of State.  2020 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Volume 1. Drug and Chemical 
Control. March 2021.  Available at https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/International-
Narcotics -Control- Strategy -Report-Volume-I- FINAL -1.pdf . A ccessed August 23, 2021.  
336 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 N ational Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008- 21: 85.  
337 U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration. 2020 National Drug Threat Assessment. March 
2021; DEA -DCT -DIR-008- 21: 121.  
338 Finklea, Kristin.  Illicit Drug Flows and Seizures  in the United States: What Do We [Not] Know?.  Congressional 
Research Service.  July 3, 2019.  
339 U.S. Department of the Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.  Advisory on Illicit Activity Involving 
Convertible Virtual Currency.  May 9, 2019; FIN -2019-A003. Available at 
https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/advisory/2019 -05-
10/FinCEN%20Advisory%20CVC%20FINAL%20508.pdf . Accessed o n A ugust 24, 2021.  
340 Department of Treasury, Bank Secrecy Act. https://www.fincen.gov/resources/fincens- mandate -congress . 
341 Department of Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Center. https://www.fincen.gov/anti-money-laundering-
act-2020  
342 Department of Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Center. National Strategy to Combat Terrorism and other 
Illicit Financing. 2020; Available at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/National- Strategy -to-
Counter- Illicit-Financev2.pdf . A ccessed on August 23, 2021.  
343 The White House.  21st Century Drug Trafficking: Advisories on Fentanyl and Other Synthetic Opioids.  August 
21, 2019.  Available at https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/White- House -
Fentanyl-Advisories-Summary.pdf . A ccessed on August 24, 2021.  
344 The White House.  Advisory to the Chemical Manufacturing Industry on Illicit Activity and Methods Related to 
the Manufacturing of Fentanyl and Synthetic Opioids.  August 21, 2019.  Available at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Fentanyl-Advisory- Manufacturing -Tab-
A.pdf .  A ccessed on August 24, 2021.  
345 The White House.  Advisory to Digital Private Secto r Platforms on Illicit Activity and Methods Related to the 
Marketing of Fentanyl and Synthetic Opioids.  August 21, 2019.  Available at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Fentanyl-Advisory- Marketing -Tab-
B.pdf . A ccessed on August 24, 2021.  
346 The White House.  Advisory to the Shipping Industry on the Illicit Movement Methods Related to the Trafficking 
of Fentanyl and Other Synthetic Opioids.  August 21, 2019.  Available at 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Fentanyl-Advisory- Movement -Tab-
C.pdf . A ccessed on August 24, 2021.  
347 The White House.  Advisory to Financial Institutions on Illicit Financial Schemes and Methods Related to the 
Trafficking of Fentanyl and Other Synthetic Opioids.  August 21, 2019.  Available at 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  145  
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Fentanyl-Advisory-Money- Tab-D.pdf . 
Accessed on August 24, 2021.  
348 U.S. Departmen t of Justice. Drug Enforcement Administration. DEA implements ecommerce outreach program 
to combat counterfeit drug production. August 2020. Available at, https://www.dea.gov/press-
releases/2020/08/04/dea- implements -ecommerce -outreach -program- combat -counterfeit -drug. .  A ccessed 
on August 20, 2021.  
349 The White House.  United States Key Deliverables for the 2016 North American Leaders ’ Summit.  June 29, 2016.  
Available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the- press -office/2016/06/29/fa ct-sheet -united- states -
key-deliverables -2016-north- american -leaders . A ccessed on August 24, 2021.  
350 The White House.  FACT SHEET: Key Deliverables for the 2021 North American Leaders’ Summit.  November 
18, 2021.  Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing- room/statements -releases/2021/11/18/fact-
sheet -key-deliverables -for-the-2021-north- american -leaders -summit/. A ccessed on March 3, 2022.  
351 U.S. Department of State.  Press Briefing on U.S. -EU political dialogue on drugs as well as U.S. -EU cooperation 
to address the opioid crises, cocaine trafficking.  November 9, 2017.  Available at https://2017-
2021.state.gov/telephonic- press -briefing- with-james -a-walsh -das-for-international- narcotics -law-
enforcement -affairs/index.html. A ccessed on August 23, 2021.  
352 Columbia University. National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. Behind Bars Ii : Substance Abuse and 
America's Prison Population. New York, NY: National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at 
Columbia University; 2010.  
353 Nellis. A. The Color of Justice: Racial and Ethnic Disparity in State Prisons . The Sentencing Project, Octob er 
2021. https://www.sentencingproject.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/06/The-Color-of- Justice -Racial -and-
Ethnic- Disparity -in-State -Prisons.pdf ; accessed February 20, 2022.  
354Binswanger IA, Stern MF, Deyo RA, et al. Release from prison — a high risk of death for former inmates. The 
new england journal of medicine . 2007;356(2):157 -165. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa064115.  
355 Rana purwala SI, Shanahan ME, Alexandridis AA, et al. Opioid overdose mortality among former north carolina 
inmates: 2000–2015. American journal of public health. 2018;108(9):1207-1213. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2018.304514 
356 Kubic, M. W., Pendergrass, T. (2017). Divers ion programs are cheaper and more effective than incarceration. 
Prosecutors should embrace them. Retrieved from https://www. aclu.org/blog/smart- justice/diversion -
programs- are-cheaper -and-more- effective- incarceration -prosecutors ; and Ziedenberg, J, Schiraldi, V, & 
McVay, D., Treatment or Incarceration: National and State Findings on the Efficacy and Cost Savings of 
Drug Treatmen t Versus Imprisonment. Open Society Foundation and Justice Policy Institute. 2004.  
Treatment Versus Incarceration (opensocietyfoundations.org)  
357 Green, T. C., Clarke, J., Brinkley -Rubinstein, L., Marshall, B. D. L., Alexander -Scott, N., Boss, R., & Rich, J. D. 
(2018). Postincarceration Fatal Overdoses After Implementing Medications for Addiction Treatment in a Statewide Correctional System.  JAM A Psychiatry, 75 (4), 405- 407. 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.4614 
358 Marsden J, Stillwell G, Jones H, et al. Does exposure to opioid substitution treatment at prison release reduce the 
risk of death? a prospective, observational study in england. The lancet . 2016;388:11. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(16)32247-4 
359 Marsden, J., Stillwell, G., Jones, H., Cooper, A., Eastwood, B., Farrell, M., Lowden, T., Maddalena, N., 
Metcalfe, C., Shaw, J., & Hickman, M. (2017). Does Exposure to Opioid Substitution Treatment in Prison Reduce the Risk of Death after Release? A National Prospective Observational Study in England.  Addiction 
(Abingdon, England), 112(8), 1408- 1418. 10.1111/add.13779 [doi]  
360 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2019). Medications for Opioid Use Disorder Save 
Lives.  (Consensus Study Report). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/25310  
361 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (20 19). Medications for Opioid Use Disorder Save 
Lives.  (Consensus Study Report). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/25310  
362 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2019). Medications for Opioid Use Disorder Save 
Lives.  (Consensus Study Report). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://d oi.org/10.17226/25310  
363 Wyse JJ, Morasco BJ, Dougherty J, et al. Adjunct interventions to standard medical management of 
buprenorphine in outpatient settings: a systematic review of the evidence. Drug and alcohol dependence . 
2021. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep. 2021.108923 
364 Jail and Prison Opioid Project. (2021). Explore the Data. Retrieved from http://dev.prisonopioidproject.org/  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  146  
365 Wakeman SE, Rich JD. Addiction treatment within u.s. correctional facilities: b ridging the gap between current 
practice and evidence- based care. Journal of addictive diseases . 2015;34(2-3):220-225. 
doi:10.1080/10550887.2015.1059217 
366 Bandara, S., Kennedy -Hendricks, A., Merritt, S., Barry, C. L., & Saloner, B. (2021). Methadone and 
buprenorphine treatment in United States jails and prisons: lessons from early adopters. Addiction 
(Abingdon, England) , 10.1111/add.15565. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1111/add.15565  
367 Healt h and Human Services Department. (2021). Practice Guidelines for the Administration of Buprenorphine 
for Treating Opioid Use Disorder. Federal Registrar. Practice Guidelines for the Administration of 
Buprenorphine for Treating Opioid Use Disorder  
368 Knight K, Farabee D, editors. Treating Addicted Offenders: A Continuum of Effective Practices.  Kingston, NJ: 
Civic Research Institute; 2004; and Leukefeld CG, Tims F, Farabee D, editors. Treatment of Drug 
Offenders: Policies and Issues.  New York, NY: Sprin ger; 2002.  
369 Maradiaga JA, Nahvi S, Cunningham CO, Sanchez J, Fox AD. "I Kicked the Hard Way. I Got Incarcerated." 
Withdrawal from Methadone During Incarceration and Subsequent Aversion to Medication Assisted 
Treatments. J Subst Abuse Treat . 2016;62:49-54. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2015.11.004 
370 National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2017). Treating opioid addiction in criminal justice settings. Bethesda, MD. 
https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/policybrief -cj.pdf  
371 Rich, J. D., McKenzie, M., Larney, S., Wong, J. B., Tran, L., Clarke, J. et al. (2015). Methadone continuation 
versus forced withdrawal on incarceration in a combined US prison and jail: A randomised, openlabel trial. 
The Lancet, 386, 350-359. 
372 Green, T. C., Clarke, J., Brinkley -Rubinstein, L., Marshall, B. D., Alexander -Scott, N., Boss, R. et al. (2018). 
Postincarceration fatal overdoses after implementing medications for addiction treatment in a statewide 
correctional system. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 405- 407. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.4614  
373 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2019). Medications for opioid use disorder save 
lives. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538936/  
374 Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration. (2019). Use of medication- assisted treatment for 
opioid use disorder in criminal justice settings  (HHS Pub. No. PEP19- MATUSECJS). Rockville, MD. 
https://store.samhsa.gov/product/Use-of- Medication -Assisted -Treatment -for-Opioid- Use-Disorder- in-
Criminal- Justice -Settings/PEP19 -MATUSECJS  
375 National Association of Drug Court Professionals. (2013). Adult Drug Court Best Practice Standards  (Vol. I -
Text Revision). Alexandria, VA.  
376 National Association of Drug Court Professionals. (2015). Adult Drug Court Best Practice Standards  (Vol. II -
Text Revision). Alexandria, VA.  
377 Nordstrom BR, Marlowe DB, National Drug Court Institute (U.S.). Medication- Assisted Treatment for Opioid 
Use Disorders in Drug Courts : Ensuring the Safe, Effective, and Responsible Use of Addiction 
Medications for Drug Court Participants . Alexandria, VA: National Drug Court Institute; 2016.  
378 Legal Action Center. (2009). Know your rights: Rights for individuals on medication- assisted treatment. (Rep. 
No. SMA -09-4449). Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administra tion 
379 US Department of Justice. Coordinating Council on Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Meeting. 
https://juvenilecouncil.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh301/files/media/document/march -14-2019-coordinating-
council- meeting -summary.pdf . Accessed on April 18, 2022.  
380 Kennedy- Hendricks, A., Bandara, S., Merritt, S., Barry, C. L., & Saloner, B. (2021). Struct ural and 
organizational factors shaping access to medication treatment for opioid use disorder in community 
supervision. Drug and alcohol dependence , 226, 108881. Advance online publication. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2021.108881  
381 Bureau of Justice Statistsics, U.S. Department of Justice. Jail Inmates in 2020 – Statistical Tables. Available at: 
https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/ji20st.pdf . 
382 Comprehensive Opioid, Stimulant, and Substance Abuse Program. (2021). The Building Bridges Initiative. 
Retrieved from https://bridges.cossapresources.org/  
383 42 U.S.C. 1396d, §1905, Social Security Act. Note that there is a limited exception to this policy; Medicaid 
dollars are available for an inmate experiencing an inpatient stay of 24 hours or more. See 
https://www.medicaid.gov/sites/default/files/Federal- Policy -Guidance/Downloads/sho16007.pdf . 
384 Bandara, S., Kennedy -Hendricks, A., Merritt, S., Barry, C. L., & Saloner, B. (2021). Methadone and 
buprenorphine treatment in United States jails and prisons: lessons from early adopters. Addiction 
(Abingdon, England) , 10.1111/add.15565. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1111/add.15565  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  147  
385 U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. (2021). HHS Releases New Buprenorphine Practice Guidelines, 
Expanding Access to Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder. Retrieved from 
https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2021/04/27/hhs- releases -new-buprenorphine- practice-guidelines-
expanding- access -to-treatment -for-opioid- use-disorder.html#:~:text=Practitioners -percent20who-
percent20do-percent20not- percent20wish -percent20to -percent20practice -percent20under,drugs-percent2C-
percent20covered -percent20under -percent20the-percent20CSA- percent2C -percent20such -percent20as -
percent20buprenorphine . 
386 U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration. (2001). Emergency narcotic addiction treatment. 
Retrieved from https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/pubs/advisories/emerg_treat.htm  
387 The Biden -Harris Administration’s Statement of Drug Policy Priorities for Year One. The White House. 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/BidenHarris- Statement -of-Drug -Policy -Prioritie s-
April -1.pdf?fbclid=IwAR2TBk34U_XRqlqK_pAYnUd_9f7zY3IbCQI9KxI6S5eYeRJdFzl9B09hZ84. 
Published April 1, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2021.  
388 The Biden Plan for Strengthening America's Commitment to Justice. Joe Biden's Criminal Justice Policy/Joe 
Biden. https://joebiden.com/justice/ . Published July 23, 2019. Accessed September 2, 2021.  
389 American C ivil Liberties Union. (2020). A Tale of Two Countries: Racially Targeted Arrests in the Era of 
Marijuana Reform.  American Civil Liberties Union. 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/tale_of_two_countries_racially_targeted_arrests_in
_the_era_of_marijuana_reform_revised_7.1.20_0.pdf  
390 Nicosia, N., Macdonald, J . M., & Arkes, J. (2013). Disparities in Criminal Court Referrals to Drug Treatment and 
Prison for Minority Men.  American Journal of Public Health, 103 (6), e77-e84. 
391 Bhati AS, Roman J, Chalfin A, Justice Policy Center. To Treat or Not to Treat : Evidence on the Prospects of 
Expanding Treatment to Drug- Involved Offenders . Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, Justice Policy 
Center; 2008. http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/411645_treatment_offenders.pdf . Accessed September 
2, 2021.  
392 Arnold, A., Benally, P., Friedrich, M. (2020). Drug Courts in the Age of Sentencing Reform. Center for Court 
Innovation. 
393 Criminal Justice Policy Foundation. (n.d.). Mandatory minimum and sentencing reform. Retrieved from 
https://www.cjpf.org/mandatory- minimums . 
394 Eisen, L.B. (2015). Mandatory Minimum Sentences – Time to End Counterproductive Policy. Retrieved from 
https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/mandatory- minimum-s entences -time-end-
counterproductive-policy. 
395 Report on the Rhode Island Department of Corrections’ Population FY 1976 - FY 2016. State of Rhode Island 
and Providence Plantations - Planning & Research Unit. 
http://www.doc.ri.gov/docs/RIDOC's%20Population%20FY1976%20-%20FY2016.pdf . Published June 
2017. Accessed September 2, 2021.  
396 American Civil Liberties Union. (n.d.). Sentencing Reform. Retrieved from https://www.ac lu.org/issues/smart-
justice/sentencing -reform  
397 The Pew Charitable Trusts, “Time Served: The High Cost, Low Return of Longer Prison Terms” (2012), 19,   
http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/assets/2012/06/06/time_served_report.pdf  
398 The Pew Charitable Trusts. (2018). More Imprisonment Does Not Reduce State Drug Problems.  
https://www.pewtrusts.org/-
/media/assets/2018/03/pspp_more_imprisonment_does_not_reduce_state_drug_problems.pdf  
399 National Association Of Drug Court Professionals. (2021). Welcome To The ARK . Retrieved from 
https://ark.nadcp.org/  
400 Criminal Justice Knowledge Bank. (2018). Richmond County: HOPE Program. Retrieved from 
https://knowledgebank.criminaljustice.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2021/08/criminal- justice -knowledge-
bank-program-profile_richmond- co-hope_082021.pdf  
401 Kubic, M. W., Pendergrass, T. (2017). Diversion programs are cheaper and more effective than incarceration. 
Prosecutors should embrace them. Retrieved from https://www.aclu.org/blog/smart- justice/diversion -
programs- are-cheaper -and-more- effective- incarceration -prosecutors  
402 Zarkin, G. A., Cowell, A. J., Hicks, K. A., Mills, M. J., Belenko, S., Dunlap, L. J., & Keyes, V. (2015). Lifetime 
Benefits and Costs of Diverting Substance -Abusing Offenders From State Prison. Crime & Delinquency , 
61(6), 829–850. https://doi.org/10.1177/0011128712461904  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  148  
403 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation Office of 
Disability, Aging and Long- Term Care Policy. (2019). Approaches to Early Jail Diversion: Collaborations 
& Innovations. Retrieved from https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/262096/EarlyJail.pdf  
404 Duwe G. Evaluating the minnesota comprehensive offender reentry plan (mcorp): results from a randomized 
experiment. Justice quarterly. 2012;29(3):347- 383. doi:10.1080/07418825.2011.555414 
405 Amy E. Hirsch et al., Every Door Closed: Barriers Facing Parents with Criminal Records , Center for Law and 
Social Policy and Community Legal Services, 2002 
406 Marlow E, White MC, Chesla CA. Barriers and facilitators: parolees' perceptions of community health care. J 
Correct Health Care. 2010 Jan;16(1):17- 26. doi: 10.1177/1078345809348201. Epub 2009 Oct 26.  
407 Joudrey, Paul J. et al. “A Conceptual Model for Understanding Post -Release Opioid -Related Overdose Risk.” 
Addiction Science and Clinical Practice. Vol. 14. Published April 15, 2019, 
https://ascpjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13722-019-0145-5 . 
408 Merrall EL, Kariminia A, Binswa nger IA, et al. Meta- analysis of drug- related deaths soon after release from 
prison. Addiction . 2010;105(9):1545- 1554. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.02990.x 
409 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Intercept 4: ReEntry. 
https://www.samhsa.gov/criminal-juvenile- justice/sim- overview/intercept -4 
410 Miller, Terry; Lauer, Aaron; Mihok, Briana; and Karlie Haywood. A Continuum of Care Approach; Western 
Pennsylvania’s Response to the Opioid Epidemic. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Institute of 
Politics, 2016, http://d -scholarship.pitt.edu/29950/1/IOPOpioidReport2016.pdf. P. 26  
411 Warm Hand -Offs in Pennsylvania. A Task Force and Advisory Committee Report. Joint State Government 
Commission. Retrieved at: http://www.jsg.legis.state.pa.us/resources/documents/ftp/publications/2020 -12-
29%20(2019HR216)WARM%20HAND-OFFS%20REPORT%2012.28.20.pdf . Published December 2020. 
Accessed September 2, 2021.  
412 Hubbard, William C. (2015) "Remarks on Collateral Consequences of Mass Incarceration," Criminal Law 
Practitioner : Vol. 2 : Iss. 2 , Article 3.    
413 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Collateral Consequences: The Crossroads of Punishment, Redemption, and the 
Effects on Communities. In. Washington, DC. 2019.  
414 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Collateral Consequences: The Crossroads of Punishment, Redemption, and the 
Effects on Communities. In. Washington, DC. 2019.  
415 The White House. Memorandum on Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence -
Based Policymaking. January 27, 2021. Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/memorandum-on-restoring- trust-in-government-through- scientific -
integrity -and-evidence-bas ed-policymaking/ . Accessed on January 6, 2022.  
416 National Research Council. Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We Don’t Know Keeps Hurting 
Us. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 2001. (Page 2)  
417 In addition to official NSDUH reports, a detailed history of NSDUH and drug policy is  available in Gfroerer,J. 
War Stories from the Drug Survey – How Culture, Politics, and Statistics Shaped the National Survey on 
Drug Use and Health. New York: Cambridge University Press. 2019.  
418 Maruschak LM, Bronson J, Alper M. Alcohol and Drug Use and Treatment Reported by Prisoners. Bureau of 
Justice Statistics. July 2021. Available at https://www.ojp.gov/library/publications/alcohol- and-drug- use-
and-treatment -reported -prisoners-survey-prison- inmates . Accessed on July 13, 2021.  
419 Hedegaard H, Bastian BA, Trinidad JP, Spencer M, Warner M. Drugs Most Frequently Involved in Drug 
Overdose Deaths: United States, 2011- 2016, National Vital Statistics Reports Vol. 67, No. 9 (December 12, 
2018). Available at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr67/nvsr67_09-508.pdf  . Accessed on 
December 13, 2018.  
420 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. NEMSIS overview. Available at https://nemsis.org/ . Accessed 
on April 18, 2022 .  
421 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Fatality Analysis Reporting System. Available at 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/research- data/fatality -analysis -reporting- system -fars. Accessed on April 18, 2022.  
422 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. WISQARS – Web -based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting 
System. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html . Accessed on April 18, 2022 .  
423 United State Consumer Product Safety Commission. National Electronic Injury Surveillance System. Available                                    
at https://www.cpsc.gov/Research --Statistics/NEISS -Injury- Data . Accessed on April 18, 2022 . 
424 Washington/Baltimore High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA). ODMAP overview. Av ailable 
athttps://www.hidta.org/odmap/. Accessed April 18, 2022.   
425 ONDCP. The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the United States 1992-2002 . Washington, DC: 2004.  
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  149  
426 ONDCP press release, UPDATED: ONDCP Releases Data on Coca Cultivation and Potential Cocaine 
Production in the Andean Region. July 16, 2021. Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/briefing-
room/2021/07/16/ondcp- releases -data-on-coca-cultivation -and-potential- cocaine-production- in-the- andean -
region/ . Accessed on July 21, 2021.  
427 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance – United States, 2019.  MMWR 
69(SS- 01) August 21, 2020. Available at 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/reports_factsheet_publications.htm#anchor_1596725978 . 
Accessed on August 24, 2020.  
428 Quest Diagnostics. Marijuana Workforce Drug Test Positivity Continues Double -Digit Increases to Keep Overall 
Drug Positivity Rates at Historically High Levels, Finds Latest Quest Diagnostics Drug Testing Index 
Analysis. May 26, 2021. Available at https://www.questdiagnostics.com/dms/Documents/Employer -
Solutions/DTI-2021/quest-drug- testing -index- press -release -2021/2021-quest-diagnostics-drug- testing -
index-report- press -release.pdf . Accessed on May 27, 2021.  
429 Community Anti -Drug Coalitions of America (CADCA). Building Drug- Free Communities overview.  Available 
at https://www.cadca.org/ . Accessed on April 18, 2022.  
430 National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors. Overview.  Available at https://nasadad.org/ . 
Accessed on April 18, 2022 . 
431 Section 9 of the Executive Order on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities 
through the Federal Government . Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-advancing- racial -equity- and-support-for-underserved- communities -
through-the- federal -government/ . Accessed on July 22, 2021.   
432 Medley G, Lipari RN, Bose J. Sexual Orientation and Estimates of Adult Substance Use and Mental Health: 
Results from th e 2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. NSDUH Data Review, SAMHSA. 
October 2016. Available at https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH -SexualOrientation -
2015/NSDUH- SexualOrientation -2015/NSDUH- SexualOrientation -2015.pdf . Accessed on May 31, 2021.  
433 Jones CM, Clayton HB, Deputy NP, Roehler DR, Ko JY, et al. Prescription Opioid Misuse and Use of Alcohol 
and Other Substances Among High School Students – Youth Risk Behavior Survey, United States, 2019. 
MMWR  69(1):38- 46 August 21, 2020. Available at 
https://www .cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/2019/su6901-H.pdf . Accessed on June 2, 2021.  
434 National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drug Use Among Racial/Ethnic Minorities  (Revised). U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health. 2003.  
435 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.   
https://www.cdc.gov/nndss/index.html . Accessed on November 30, 2021.  
436 University of Maryland Center for Substance Abuse Research. Community Drug Early Warning System. 
Available at https://cesar.umd.edu/landing/CDEWS . Accessed on May 31, 2021.  
437A narrative account of where the United States is on wastewater -based epidemiology is found in: Weiss M. 
Sewage Has Stories to Tell. Why Won’t U.S. listen? Smithsonian Magazine. April 26, 2021. (reprint from 
Undark). Available at https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science -nature/will- us-finally -embrace -sewage-
analysis -improve-public- health -
180977570/?utm_source=smithsoniandaily&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=20210426- daily -
responsive&spMailingID=44870393&spUserID=NzQwNDU1MzQzNzcS1&spJobID=1984111673&spRe
portId=MTk4NDExMTY3MwS2. Accessed on May 31, 2021.  
438 National Science Foundation. Covid- 19 Response Funding Update. January 19, 2021. Available at 
https://www.nsf.gov/about/congress/funding-percent20updates/COVID_update_Jan19.pdf . Accessed on 
May 31, 2021.  
439European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. Wastewater -based epidemiology and drugs topic 
page. Available at  https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/topics/wastewater_en . Accessed on May 31, 2021.  
440 Sewage Analysis CORe group Europe (SCORE). https://score -cost.eu/ . Accessed on May 31, 2021.  
441 A brief description of this series is available at https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526 . 
Accessed on August 16, 2021. https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526 . Accessed 
on August 16, 2021. https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526 . Accessed on August 
16, 2021. https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526. Accessed on August 16, 2021. 
https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526 . Accessed on August 16, 2021. 
https://www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/cfda/series/526 . Accessed on August 16, 2021.  
442 Green, TC, Park JN, Gilbert M, McKenzie M, Struth E, et al. An assessment of the limits of detection, sensitivity, 
and specificity of three devices for public health- based drug checking of fentanyl in street -acquired 
 
NATIONAL  DRUG  CONTROL  STRATEGY  150  
samples. International Journal of Drug Policy 77. 2020. Available at 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2020.102661 . Accessed on June 24, 2021.  
443 Anghel LA, Farcas AM, Oprean RN. An overview of the common methods used to measure treat ment adherence. 
Med Pharm Rep. 2019;92(2):117-122. 
444 Caces MF, Delaney PJ, Cala MA. The impact of prescription pain reliever misuse and heroin use on morbidity 
and mortality by level of urbanicity: 2002-2004, Contemporary Rural Social Work Journal  Volume 1 1, 
Number 1, Article 7. 2019.  
445 National Research Council. Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We Don’t Know Keeps Hurting 
Us. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 2001. Available https://doi.org/10.17226/10021 . 
446 National Information Exchange Model. Available at https://www.niem.gov/ . Accessed on January 5, 2022.  
447 The SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act , 21 U.S.C. 21 U.S. Code § 1705 - Development, submission, 
implementation, and assessment of National Drug Control Strategy, Section (f).  
448 United Nations. World Drug Report 2021 . Available online at https://wdr.unodc.org/wdr2021/index.html . 
Accessed on June 24, 2021.  
449 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Evidence- Based Strategies for Preventing Opioid Overdose: 
What’s Working in the United States.  National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. Available at 
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/pdf/pubs/2018- evidence- based -strategies.pdf , accessed on April 1, 
2021.  
450 The Washington Post. “Trump administration freezes database of addiction and mental health treatments.” 
January 10, 2018. Available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health -science/trump -
administration -freezes -database-of-addiction- and-mental -health -programs/2018/01/10/ed421654-f577-
11e7-beb6-c8d48830c54d_story.html , accessed on May 28, 2021.  
451 SAMHSA. Evidence- Based Practices Resource Center . Available at https://www.samhsa.gov/resource-
search/ebp , accessed on May 28, 2021.  
452 National Institute of Justice. Crime Solutions . Available at https://crimesolutions.ojp.gov/ . Accessed on May 12, 
2021.  