 
1 
 Logic: A Brief Introduction  
Ronald L. Hall, Stetson University  
 
Chapter 4 –  Identifying Fallacies  
4.1 Introduction   
 Ludwig Wittgenstein once said that his aim in philosophy was to turn disguised nonsense into patent 
nonsense. What he was implying in th is cryptic remark is that patent (obvious) nonsense, being easy to spot, is not 
as dangerously misleading as nonsense that is disguised as sense. Our task in this chapter is to unmask some 
common cases of disguised nonsense. When we do, we will be less pro ne to fall for their illusion of sense.  
 At one time or another, we have all had the illusion that some conclusion followed from a given set of 
premises when in fact it did not. We might have even acted on such an illusion. Logicians call such deceptive 
arguments, however psychologically convincing they may be, logical fallacies.  
 Some of these fallacies occur so often and are so psychologically convincing that we need to be on special 
alert to avoid them. The best way to do this is to identify (by name) e xamples of them, and to see exactly why the 
conclusions of such fallacious arguments do not follow from their premises. (There are a couple of exceptions to 
this rule. As we will discuss presently, the fallacy of complex question may not be formally invali d, but it is always 
invites bad reasoning. The other exception is the fallacy of begging the question, which is technically both valid 
and sound, but nevertheless a case of bad reasoning. I will say more about these exceptions in due course.)  
 The list of fallacies varies with different authors.  Some, however, appear to be common to every list and 
our list includes most of these standard fallacies. As well, our list divides the fallacies into two general categories: 
Fallacies of Relevance and Fallacies of Ambiguity . 
 Fallacies in the first category occur in those cases in which the content of the premises bears little or no 
logical relevance to the conclusion. Fallacies of the second category occur in those cases in which a word, phrase, 
or passage has no c lear meaning  
4.2 Fallacies of Relevance  
1. Force  
 When a speaker or writer formulates an argument it is usually with the intention of convincing some 
audience to accept its conclusion. For example, suppose someone tries to convince a group that it ought t o play 
soccer instead of basketball. The reasons offered are as follows: (1) the basketball court is in bad shape, and (2) 
most in the group would rather play soccer than basketball anyway. Giving reasons for taking one course of action 
rather than another  is, however, not the only way of trying to get an audience to accept a conclusion. Suppose the 
owner of the basketball and the soccer ball says that he thinks that the group ought to play basketball and further 
that if the group does not agree but wants t o play soccer instead he tells them he will not allow the group to use his 
soccer ball. We have now abandoned the technique of rational argument and entered the realm of coercion. And of 
course coercion is psychologically convincing and often works. Most l ikely the group will end up playing 
basketball. However, whenever a person attempts to coerce his or her audience to accept a conclusion on the basis 
of a threat, veiled or explicit, we say that a logical fallacy has occurred. We call this fallacy an appea l to force.  
(Sometimes this fallacy is referred to by its Latin name, Argumentum ad Baculum , which means “argument from 
the stick.”)  
 
2 
 It should be obvious to you that appeals to force, while psychologically convincing, are not valid arguments.  
Consider the difference between the following two attempts of parents to convince their child to go to college. 
A. You ought to go to college because it will broaden your horizons.  
B. You ought to go to college because if you don’t we will disinherit you.  
 Clearly B is not offering a reason in support of going to college, but A is. Rather than offering reasons, B is 
attempting to coerce the child into attending. Whether the prospective student is in or out of his or her parent’s will 
is logically irrelevant to whether  going to college has or does not have merit. B has clearly abandoned logic in favor 
of force.  
2. Ignorance.  
 How many times have you ever heard someone say something like: “Such and such must be true because 
nobody has ever proved it is false;” or “Such  and such must be false because nobody has ever proved it is true.”  
You can fill in the “such and such” with things like “ghosts” or “God” or “aliens.” However psychologically 
convincing it may be, the fact remains that nothing follows logically from the absence of proof. From the fact that 
nobody has ever proven that the proposition “God exists” is false, it does not follow that it is true; and from the fact 
that nobody has ever proven that the proposition “God does not exist” is true, it does not follow that it is false. To 
reason this way is to commit the fallacy of appeal to ignorance (Sometimes this fallacy is referred to by its Latin 
name, Argumentum ad Ignorantiam .) 
 
 We need to be careful, however, not to dismiss every appeal to a lack of evidence as committing this 
fallacy. Sometimes an absence of evidence can count as positive evidence. For example, if the termite inspector 
tells you that you do not have termites because there is no termite dust to be found on the beams under your house, 
he or she has not committed the fallacy of appeal to ignorance. And if the doctor says that the absence of a bull’s 
eye marking around the tick bite site on your skin is evidence that you do not have Lyme disease, this is not a case 
of the fallacy of appeal to ignor ance. The facts are that if I did have termites I would likely have termite dust on the 
beams under my house and if I did have Lyme disease I would likely have a bull’s eye marking around the tick bite 
site on my skin. These cases are very different from claims like, “I do not have a soul because it has not been 
proven that I do.”  This conclusion simply does not follow. 
3. Pity  
 I hope that you are beginning to see why these fallacies are classified as fallacies of relevance. Indeed, the 
“reasons” that are given in support of the conclusions of the fallacies of relevance are not logically relevant to the 
conclusion. What this means is that the truth of the conclusion is not guaranteed by the truth of the premises.  
 In this light consider the following argument. “You ought to change my failing grade on my logic test to a 
passing grade;  for otherwise I will lose my basketball scholarship and I will have to drop out of college.” Strictly 
speaking the appeal here is logically irrelevant to the conclusion, and y et it does carry psychological weight. In fact 
there have been college professors who have fallen for this appeal. Nevertheless, such arguments are fallacious. 
Grades are intended to reflect the level of mastery the student has achieved in the subject, not  the level of pity the 
Professor feels for the student. Pity is logically irrelevant to assessments of mastery. Logicians call fallacies of this 
sort appeals to pity . (Sometimes this fallacy is referred to by its Latin name, Argumentum ad Misericordiam ) 
 Compare the argument above to this one: “You ought to change my failing grade on my logic test to a 
passing grade, because the failing grade that I got reflects a calculation error that you made; if the points were 
accurately added, my grade would no longer  be a failing one.” In this case, the Professor has good reason to change 
the grade, while in the former case she does not. If we granted good grades on the basis of pity, grades would no 
longer measure the level of mastery of the subject that the student has achieved and hence would become 
meaningless.  
 
3 
 4. Desire  
 The fallacy of desire is not always included in lists of fallacies. I include it here because we hear it so often. 
This fallacy is committed when someone concludes that such and such must be true because he or she would like it 
to be true. Consider the following example: “Believing that I have a guardian angel that watches over me gives me 
all the comfort and security I want and need on the hard road of life. That’s the reason that I believe I have one.” 
Clearly this argument reaches its conclusion on the basis of wanting something to be true.  
Compare the following two arguments:  
It makes me depressed to think that we human beings are nothing but causally determined mechanisms. I would be 
so much happier if I thought we had the freedom to make at least some choices in life.  Therefore I believe that we 
are free.  
 
It is not rational to believe x unless x is true and x is based on evidence that is accepted by the believer as 
warranting x. In other wor ds, rational beliefs are possible only for beings that possess the power of accepting or 
rejecting evidence. This power of acceptance or rejection is called freedom. If someone were to come to believe 
that human beings are merely causally determined mechan isms, then he or she must have accepted certain evidence 
as warranting this belief. However, it is possible to accept (or reject) evidence only if we are free to do so. 
Amazingly, even the claim that we are not free shows that we are. Therefore, I believe that we are free.  
 What makes the first argument above a fallacy is that its conclusion is not guaranteed by the truth of its 
premises. This is not true in the second argument. The premises in this argument are logically relevant to its 
conclusion. Indeed, in this case it certainly seems obvious that the argument is valid, for if its premises were true 
then its conclusion would have to be true. Remember, however, two things: (1) first, an argument can be fallacious 
formally without committing one of the fal lacies in our list; there are lots of examples of bad reasoning; (2) 
secondly, even if the argument in B were valid, it might still be unsound. Valid arguments are unsound, recall, 
unless all  of their premises are true.  
5. Authority 
 How often we hear peop le say things of the following form: “Such and such must be true because “So” and 
“So” said so.” Here we have an argument that is based on an appeal to authority. Arguments of this form, however, 
may or may not be fallacious.  
 Let’s consider an argument of  this form that is not fallacious. “The weapon used in the murder was a 9mm 
pistol, because the ballistics expert said so.”  In this case the appeal to the authority of the ballistics expert provides 
a perfectly legitimate ground for the conclusion.  
 Howe ver, if we appeal to an authority that is not vested with the proper credentials for making the 
judgment, then we have committed the fallacy of appeal to authority. For example, if someone were to say, “You 
can bet that the economy is going to rebound shor tly, because Pete Rose said it was going to,” then we have an 
obvious case of the fallacy.  In this case, Pete Rose, a former baseball player, is not an economist and so lacks the 
relevant authority to make such a judgment. Appeals of this sort are often r eferred to as appeals to an inappropriate 
authority. (This fallacy is sometimes referred to by its Latin name, Argumentum ad Verecumdiam .) 
 Appealing to an authority in order to provide a reason for accepting a particular conclusion becomes a 
fallacy when the authority appealed to lacks the appropriate knowledge or power to warrant its acceptance. 
Sometimes the appropriateness of the authority is not easy to discern. Consider the following two examples:  
 
4 
 A. That pitch was not a strike because the TV commentator said that it was not.  
B. That pitch was a strike because the umpire said it was.  
 In this case it might seem that the seasoned TV commentator knows enough about baseball to tell if the 
pitch was or was not a strike. However the fact remains that this commentator lacks the authority to make the call, 
whereas the umpire is vested with precisely that authority. Accordingly, the first argument may commit the fallacy 
of appeal to authority but the argument in B does not.  Now consider this: “The umpire misse d that call because (on 
the basis of a review of the play) the referee said so. ” This is certainly not an appeal to an inappropriate authority 
when it comes to making a judgment about whether or not the umpire missed the call.  As such it would not 
consti tute the fallacy of an appeal to an inappropriate authority.  
 Let me issue this caution:  sometimes even appeals to appropriate authorities may commit the fallacy of an 
appeal to authority, we need to know how to determine when they do and when they don’t . Certainly if one appeals 
to an inappropriate authority the fallacy is committed. However, if one appeals to an appropriate authority this may 
not guarantee that the fallacy is avoided. Consider this example: “Abortion is morally wrong because the Pope said 
so.” If the person who says this is a Roman Catholic, then surely the Pope is an appropriate moral authority for this 
person. So does this argument commit the fallacy of an appeal to authority or not? It depends on what the person 
intends to be claiming , and of course in many cases this may be difficult if not impossible to determine. If the 
person is saying that he accepts the reasoning of the Pope in coming to the conclusion that abortion is morally 
wrong, this is a legitimate appeal. It is legitimate because the claim is not that the Pope’s saying that abortion is 
morally wrong is what makes it morally wrong, but that the Pope says it is morally wrong because he has come to 
this conclusion on the basis of good reasons.  
 In some cases, saying that somet hing is so is enough to make it so, but not always. If a jury says that you 
are innocent then you are; if an umpire says that the pitch was a strike then it was, and this is so even if in fact you 
really are guilty, and even if the pitch was in fact out of  the strike zone. In most cases, however, saying something 
is so does not make it so, even if the one who says it is so has the relevant authority to make that judgment. 
 If I say that murder is morally wrong because the Bible says that it is and mean by t his that the Bible’s 
saying murder is morally wrong is what makes it morally wrong, then I have committed the fallacy of an 
illegitimate appeal to authority. If I say that I think that the Bible says that murder is morally wrong because its 
authors were co nvinced that it is morally wrong, then I do not commit the fallacy. A key to making this distinction 
is whether the appeal to authority is designed to stop further rational inquiry, or whether it is open to it. Appeals to 
the Bible are often of the former kind. As we hear: “The Bible says it and that settles it.” This attitude suggests that 
there is no room for further questions. If however we think that the Bible says what it says for good reasons, then 
there is room for further inquiry and assessment of t hese reasons. Appeals to the Bible of this second sort are 
certainly not fallacious.  
6. False cause  
 It is quite obvious that causes and effects are connected. Usually that connection is a temporal one. That is, 
usually causes come before effects. For exam ple, if a person has a headache and takes an aspirin or two and the 
headache goes away, he or she would probably say that the medicine caused the pain to subside. But not every such 
temporal sequence of events adds up to a cause and effect relation. It is biologically possible for a person’s 
headache to go away before the aspirin takes effect. In this case a person might mistakenly think that the aspirin 
caused the headache to go away when the relief was due to other causes.  
 
 Causes and effects, however, are not always related in such a temporal sequence. Causes and effects can 
occur simultaneously. Consider the relation between the light beam and the illuminated bulb in a flashlight. Even 
though the light beam is caused by the illuminated bulb, the beam does not occur after the bulb is illuminated but at 
precisely the same time the bulb comes on.  Again, not every such simultaneous relation of two events adds up to 
 
5 
 the conclusion that the two events are causally related. It may well be true, for example, th at every time Jupiter 
moves to a certain position in the heavens Mars simultaneously moves to a corresponding position in relation to 
Venus. Even though this alignment of Jupiter and Mars always simultaneously occurs, it would be a mistake to 
think that th e movement of one causes the movement of the other. To think that because two events always, or even 
sometimes, occur at the same time or in a temporal sequence, that they are therefore causally related, is to commit 
what logicians call the fallacy of false cause. (The fallacy of concluding that because one event precedes another 
that it is the cause of the second event is sometimes referred to by its Latin name, Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc , 
which means something like “after therefore because ”)  
 In general t he fallacy of false cause is committed whenever some event is held to be the cause of another 
when in fact the events are not causally related at all. This fallacy occurs most frequently when we are dealing with 
the chance collation of events. If, for exam ple, I fall and break my leg on the very day that a black cat crossed my 
path, and conclude that the first event caused the second, I have committed the fallacy of false cause. Superstition is 
full of such false cause fallacies.  
 Many have tried to take ad vantage of the fact that human beings are prone to see causal connections where 
they may not exist. A notable example of this is the chain letter. In such letters the recipient is asked to keep the 
chain going, and warned that some people who dared to brea k the chain met with some horrible disaster. The 
implication is that the failure to keep the chain going caused the disaster.   
 You might be thinking at this point that this example sounds awfully much like the fallacy of appeal to 
force. And you would be  exactly right. So there is no better time than now to let you know that one and the same 
argument may commit more than one fallacy. Certainly the chain letter example does. In analyzing arguments in 
the Exercises Workbook, you must try to decide which fal lacy is the most prominent one. Honest differences of 
opinion are clearly possible. 
7. Popularity  
 However much we would like to think of ourselves as individuals forging our own unique paths in life, the 
fact is we are also deeply influenced by forces of conformity. Most of us want to be accepted and to win the 
approval of others. Accordingly we are very prone to be convinced by arguments that play on the psychology of 
public opinion. For example, we are likely to think that a certain brand of clothing is the best because everybody 
who is anybody wears that brand. To come to this conclusion is a mistake in reasoning.  Reasons that make a 
certain brand preferable may include quality of workmanship but not popularity. Arguments of this sort commit 
what logicians call the fallacy of popularity. (Sometimes this fallacy is referred to by its Latin name, Argumentum 
ad Populum , which means “argument to the people.”)  
 
 We often hear commercials on TV that tell us that a certain brand of automobile sells more than an y other 
in America. American consumers buy millions of these cars every day.  Clearly this brand of car must be the best, 
for so many car buyers could not be wrong. Well, of course they could be.  Just because a car is very popular it does 
not follow that it is the best car for consumers to buy.   
 On a less materialistic level, consider the attempt to provide grounds for thinking that God exists by citing 
the fact that ninety percent of Americans believe that He (She?) does. The fact that popular opinion i s heavily 
weighted in favor of thinking that God exists is psychologically powerful but logically speaking it has no relevance 
in establishing or substantiating the truth of the claim that God exists.  
 The point here is not only that popular opinion can be  mistaken and so is not a reliable ground from which 
to draw conclusions validly. The more profound point is that even if popular opinion turns out to be correct, it is 
still logically irrelevant in establishing the truth of a conclusion.  It may be true that most people in America believe 
that God exists, but if the fallacy of popularity is to be avoided the claim that God exists needs to be established on 
different grounds, grounds that if true would guarantee the truth of the conclusion. Even if we grant  the truth of the 
claim that most Americans believe in God, it simply does not follow that God exists, for the conclusion (that God 
 
6 
 exists) could be false while the premise of the argument (that most Americans believe that God exists) is true. 
Recall that in good arguments, if the premises are true the conclusion must be true. Or put differently, a good 
(deductive) argument cannot have a false conclusion if its premises are true.     
 Sometimes the fallacy of popularity is committed by what we might call association. For example, the 
fallacy of popularity is committed when it is suggested in a commercial that a particular product has merit because 
it is associated with the wealthy, the famous, and the powerful. The fact that the rich and the famous use a 
particular product has no logical relevance as to whether it is a good product or not. However, because such images 
of extravagant lifestyles are so popular with American consumers, advertisers try to play the psychological trick of 
convincing their audience that they can have a little piece of this popular lifestyle if they buy this product.  
 Again, we meet here with the fact that more than one fallacy can be committed in a single “argument.” If 
the advertisers of a product not only place the product in an environment that is envied by the masses, but also have 
famous people endorsing the product, two fallacies may be committed. Just because Brittany Spears thinks that a 
certain brand of lawnmower is the best, it does not follow that it is. Here the fallacy is  the appeal to an 
inappropriate authority. If the endorsement were placed within a lifestyle envied by the masses, the fallacy would 
also be popularity. To decide which fallacy is the primary one, we must decide which mistake is the most 
prominent. Again, we may meet here with honest disagreement. But even if we disagree about which fallacy is the 
most prominent, there can be no denying that examples of this type commit both fallacies.   
8. Complex Question  
 Although you may not have heard of the fallacy of  complex question by name, you may have come across 
some examples of it. One of the most famous is found in the classic question: “Have you stopped beating your 
wife?” Now clearly if we are required to answer “yes” or “no” to this question we are condemned  out of our own 
mouths as being either a current wife -beater (if you answer “no”) or as a past one (if your answer is “yes”). As we 
might put it, such questions are structured in such as way as to presume the answer to an unasked question; in this 
case: “A re you a wife -beater?”  
 
 It may be difficult to see at first why such questions are called fallacies, for clearly questions are not 
arguments and fallacies are bad arguments. What makes such questions fallacies is that they are designed to lead us 
to draw conclusions that are not warranted. Drawing conclusions from assumptions that one is tricked into granting, 
that is, that one would not grant if not so tricked, is indeed bad reasoning. Even if such arguments turn out to be 
formally valid, there is no way that such arguments could be sound for the simple reason that they begin with a 
false premise that one is tricked into granting.  
 As in our example above, the question is formulated in such a way that if I answer “yes” or “no” to it, then 
it does follow th at I am a wife- beater, even if in fact I am not. In general then, complex questions are designed 
psychologically to trick someone into granting an assumption that is in fact false from which he or she wants to 
draw a conclusion that is also false, as well as incriminating. Even though the reasoning here may be valid, that is, 
even though it does follow that I am a wife -beater if I do say “yes, I have stopped beating my wife,” it could never 
be sound reasoning to conclude that I am in fact a wife -beater, at least if the premise of the argument is in fact false.   
 To avoid being tricked in this way, we must be careful not to answer such complex questions. If someone 
asks you: “Do you still cheat on your exams?” you must refuse to answer either “yes” or “no” b ecause either 
answer would imply that you are a cheater. Probably the best strategy in dealing with such questions is to make 
their implicitly answered, but unasked question, explicit and simply deny it. That is, you may say, “Your question 
assumes that I am a cheater, and I am not.”     
9. Begging the Question  
 Even though the next fallacy is called begging the question, it, unlike the previous fallacy, has nothing to 
do with the interrogative grammatical form. In this case, “the question” is simply the is sue that the argument is 
 
7 
 attempting to settle. For example, if there is a question as to whether God exists, we might try to settle this by 
giving reasons for concluding that God does exist, or for concluding that God does not exist.  We are said to 
commit  the fallacy of begging the question if we smuggle the conclusion we are trying to establish (that God does 
or does not exist) into the premises we are assuming in our argument. Consider the following argument:  
 
If what the Bible says is true, then God exi sts. 
If God inspired the Bible, then what the Bible says is true.  
There is a God and He inspired the Bible.  
Therefore, God exists.  
 
 Now clearly the third premise in this argument assumes that God exists, which is precisely the conclusion 
we are trying to establish. As this is usually put, this argument commits the fallacy of begging the question because 
it assumes what it is trying to prove. (Sometimes this fallacy is referred to by its Latin name, Petitio Principi )  
 Earlier, we said that this fallacy is an exception to the claim that fallacious arguments are invalid. In 
begging the question, we meet a fallacy that is formally valid and may even be sound.  Let’s see how this can be 
true. 
 Recall that every argument that commits the fallacy of begging the q uestion is formally valid, for if x is 
true then it follows that x is true. The problem with this reasoning, however, is that it does not get us anywhere. 
This is why such reasoning is often referred to as circular. Of course, if God exists then it follows that God exists. 
But to assume just what you are trying to prove does not establish anything. Rather, it merely draws a conclusion 
and then restates that conclusion (usually in different words, but with the same propositional content) as one of the 
premis es of the argument.  
 What may be surprising to you is that it is also possible for an argument to be sound and yet still be 
classified as a fallacy. Yet this is precisely the case with the fallacy of begging the question. Recall, a sound 
argument is a vali d one with all true premises. Consider this argument: Since more electors voted for Bill Clinton 
than for his opponent in two consecutive US presidential elections, it follows that he was twice elected to the office 
of President of the United States. Now t he premise of this argument is true and it is a formally valid argument. As 
such, we are forced to say that it is a sound argument. Nevertheless we also must say that this argument is a case of 
mistaken reasoning for it begs the question and establishes no thing other than a single assertion that is asserted 
twice in different words. One version of the assertion serves as the conclusion, the other as the premise of the 
argument. Arguments of this sort, even sound ones, get us nowhere.  
 Please reserve the phr ase “begging the question” to name the fallacy I have just discussed ; that is, the 
fallacy of assuming what one is trying to prove.  Recently I have noted that the phrase is being misused in TV 
commentary and in casual conversations.  In these cases “beggi ng the question” is used simply as a way of pleading 
for a certain question to be asked. 
10. Character -Abusive  
 When someone is involved in a disagreement and is finding that he or she is losing the argument, it often 
happens that he or she makes a shift i n strategy. Failing to support his or her position with good reasoning, he or 
she attempts to discredit his or her opponent in this disagreement by attacking his or her character. Consider this 
argument: “Your argument that abortion should be illegal is absurd. But what could we expect from a narrow -
minded moral imbecile?”  
 
 More generally, we will say this: whenever a person turns away from trying to settle a particular issue by 
rational argument and turns rather toward an attack on the character of the p erson who holds a different view on the 
issue at stake, we have a case of fallacious reasoning. We will call this the character -abusive fallacy. (This fallacy is 
 
8 
 often referred to by its general Latin name, Argumentum ad Hominem , which means “argument agai nst the 
person." Indeed sometimes this Latin name is shortened further to simply, “ Ad Hominem .”) 
 Abuse of character comes in many forms, some obvious, some subtle. Calling someone a “moral imbecile” 
is a pretty obvious case of abuse of character. But it w ould also count as abuse of character to say that someone is 
“limited” in certain ways. To say that someone is limited is not necessarily to abuse him or her, but it may be. We 
may say that our young child is limited when it comes to understanding politica l discourse, and this certainly is not 
to abuse the character of the child. However, suppose someone said: “I don’t expect that you would see the moral 
absurdity of making abortion illegal, since you are extremely limited in your ability to feel sympathy f or the rights 
of women in general.” This is no compliment of character, and in fact it is a form of abuse.  
11. Character -Circumstantial  
 Closely related to the character -abusive fallacy is the character -circumstantial fallacy. Both are Ad 
Hominem  fallacie s that turn from considerations of the merits of the argument to an attempt to discredit the person 
making the argument. The assumption of the one who argues this way is that one will be psychologically convinced 
to discredit an argument if the one making it is discredited.  
 
 Abusing the person making the argument is not, however, the only way that we can attempt to discredit the 
person making an argument that we also want to discredit. We can call attention to the special circumstances of the 
person makin g the argument with the aim of showing that the person has a special interest in defending the 
conclusion that he or she is attempting to argue for. Consider this example: “Of course you think that abortion is 
morally wrong, after all you are a Roman Catholic.” Strictly speaking, however, the fact that the person making the 
argument that abortion is morally wrong is a Roman Catholic (assuming, of course, that Roman Catholics have 
taken a united stance on this issue as mandated by official Church dogma) is l ogically irrelevant when it comes to 
giving reasons in favor of the claim that it is morally wrong. Of course calling someone a Roman Catholic is not to 
abuse him or her, but it may be a psychologically convincing way to undermine the force of the argument .Consider 
the differences between the following two arguments:  
A. Affirmative Action is a good policy because it aims at making sure that past injustices that have discriminated 
against minorities and women will be corrected.  
B. Of course A thinks that Aff irmative Action is a good policy; why wouldn’t she? After all A is a woman and 
stands to benefit from such a policy.  
 I hope you see that B commits the character -circumstantial fallacy, while A does not. We may of course 
debate A on the merits of affirmati ve action, but for considerations of this sort, knowing whether B is a member of 
a minority group or a woman is logically irrelevant to the merits of the policy itself. Even though such arguments 
are psychologically effective, they are logical fallacies.  
12. Accident  
 The next two fallacies (accident and hasty generalization) that we will deal with are mirror images of each 
other. To reflect this, so to speak, the second of these fallacies, hasty generalization, is often called converse 
accident. Both of th ese fallacies involve mistakes in reasoning with regard to what we might call general rules and 
exceptions to general rules. Let’s see how this mistake is made first in the case of the fallacy of accident.  
 
 General rules almost always have exceptions. Whe n we do not take proper account of this fact we are liable 
to draw unwarranted conclusions. Consider this example: As a general rule, it is morally wrong to lie. Therefore, 
when the Nazis knocked on the door at the house in Amsterdam during WWII where Anne  Frank was being hidden 
in the attic and inquired: “Is Anne Frank here?” the owners of the house should not have lied. Clearly this was an 
exceptional case, that is, a case in which the general rule does not apply. Certainly most people would think that it  
 
9 
 was morally wrong in this case to tell the truth, for after all, lying would save Anne Frank’s life while telling the 
truth would have condemned her to death.  
 We certainly could multiply these examples with less dramatic consequences. Consider the follo wing 
arguments, all of which commit the fallacy of accident:  
A. We ought always to help people who are having car trouble when we can. Therefore we ought to help 
those bank robbers over there that can’t seem to get their car started.  
 
B. We ought always to obey the posted speed limits. Therefore that ambulance driver should be given a 
speeding ticket.  
 
C. We ought always to respect the right of every American to vote. Therefore we must allow convicted felons 
the right to vote.  
 
D. Americans believe that it is morally unacceptable to exclude whole groups of people (like women) from 
having the right to vote. Therefore, in America it is morally unacceptable to exclude the whole group of 
convicted felons from having the right to vote.  
13. Hasty Generalization  
 Hasty generalization, like its opposite, accident, is a fallacy that involves general rules and exceptional 
cases. In the fallacy of accident the mistake comes in reasoning from a generalization to an exceptional case. In this 
fallacy of hasty generalizati on, we reason in the opposite direction. (This is why this fallacy is sometimes referred 
to as the fallacy of converse accident.)  That is, in this fallacy we start from an exceptional case and proceed to 
draw a conclusion from it in the form of a general rule. If the sample of cases on the basis of which a generalization 
is made is very small these cases may be exceptional. As such a generalization on the basis of a small pool of 
particular cases may be too hasty and accordingly not justified. Again, excep tions do not make good rules. Consider 
the following examples:  
 
A. It is morally right to lie when the Nazis inquire as to whether Anne Frank is in the attic. Therefore, it is 
always morally right to lie. 
 
B. We ought not to help Robbers get their getaway car started. Therefore, we never ought to help people 
with car trouble.  
 
C. Ambulance drivers are allowed to speed, therefore everybody should be allowed to speed.  
 
D. In America it is morally acceptable to exclude the whole group of convicted felons from having the right 
to vote. Therefore it is morally acceptable to exclude whole groups of people, such as women, from having 
the right to vote  
 
10 
 14. Irrelevant Conclusion  
 All of the fallacies we have looked at so far have been ones in which the premises, however 
psychologically compelling, are logically irrelevant to the conclusions they are offered in support of. So why do we 
have a separate fallacy entitled irrelevant conclusion? The reason is that we need a category of fallacy that will 
cover all of the cases of irrelevancy that are not covered by the other fallacies.  
 
 One such case is as follows. Sometimes in an argument premises are offered that do not in fact support the 
conclusion they are offered in support of, but another conclusion that is not at is sue and is often readily agreed to. 
When this happens, we say that the argument commits the fallacy of irrelevant conclusion. (This fallacy is 
sometimes referred to by its Latin name, Ignoratio Elenchi , that is, “false refutation.”)  
 An example of this fal lacy will help you identify it. Suppose that a Congresswoman is trying to convince 
her colleagues in the House to vote for Fair Housing Bill #4. Rather than giving reasons for supporting this 
particular bill, she offers reasons in favor of fair housing. Now virtually all of her colleagues agree that fair housing 
is a good thing. So, either from her own lack of clarity, or from an intentional attempt to get this bill passed, by 
hook or crook, as it were, she purports to argue for this particular bill but in fact argues the merits of fair housing. 
To make such an argument concluding that fair housing is a good thing is easy, since everyone, or nearly everyone, 
already agrees to it. But such an argument commits the fallacy of irrelevant conclusion because the r eal issue is not 
argued for. That is, why, given that fair housing is a good thing, is this  bill worthy of being passed? Will this bill 
promote fair housing? We could all agree that fair housing is a good thing, but honestly disagree about whether 
passing this  bill is the best way to get it.  
 Consider one more example of this fallacy: “I think that you ought to go to law school. The law profession 
is a very noble and respected one. As well, many successful lawyers make a fortune.”  The premises, true as they 
may be, do not establish that I ought to go to law school. This may be convincing however, since this argument is 
actually directed to establishing that the practice of law is an esteemed profession, something most would readily 
agree to.  However, the f act is that considerations of this sort are logically irrelevant to the question of whether law 
school is the best place for me, given my talents, interests, resources, etc.  
4.3 Fallacies of Ambiguity  
 The fallacies we have been dealing with so far have al l involved the issue of logical relevance. Arguments 
that commit these fallacies do so because the premises of these arguments, however psychologically relevant, are 
logically irrelevant to their conclusions.  
 Unlike these fallacies of relevance, the falla cies in the next group of fallacies —the fallacies of ambiguity —
consist of mistakes in reasoning that are committed because of an ambiguity in the terms used in an argument. For 
example, a fallacy of ambiguity is committed whenever there is a word, or phras e, or whole passage that has more 
than one meaning and this lack of clarity of meaning leads to unwarranted conclusions. We will consider five of the 
most commonly committed such fallacies of ambiguity.  
15. Equivocation  
 Many words in English have more tha n one meaning, including the word “word.” To see this, ask yourself: 
“How many words is the word “bark?” You probably want to say: “It depends.” And you would be right. If you 
mean by “word” simply that particular group of letters "b- a-r-k," then the answe r is one. If you mean by “word” its 
various meanings, then it has at least two literal meanings, the covering of a tree and the sound that a dog makes, 
and lots of metaphorical ones, as in “His bark was worse than his bite.” And certainly when one says: “Y ou have 
my word on it,” this does not imply that some letters are printed on whatever “it” happens to be  
. 
 Considerations of context are absolutely important in achieving clarity in what we say and write. However, 
sometimes context is not sufficient to av oid ambiguity. In such cases extra effort to avoid confusion is necessary. 
This may include changing the syntax (word order) of a passage, making it clear which meaning an ambiguous 
 
11 
 word in that passage has, and making sure that it is used consistently wit h just that one meaning throughout the 
passage or argument. Inattention to these matters often leads to the fallacy of equivocation.  
Consider this example:  
“If I have a mind, then I must not be completely a physical being. It was confirmed that I have a mi nd the other 
day at the hospital when my skull was x -rayed.  Therefore, I must not be completely physical.”  
 In this case, this person may not have been aware that he or she was using the term “mind” in one instance 
to mean something like “soul” and in ano ther to mean “brain.” Quite obviously x- ray machines could establish that 
I have a brain, but they could not establish the presence of something non- physical. We can take a picture of the 
brain, but we cannot take a picture of the soul. We say in this case  that the person who put the argument forth was 
equivocating on the term “mind.”  
 Sometimes there is an intentional playing on the ambiguity of a word. This may be done in order to trick 
some audience into drawing a conclusion that does not follow from a s et of premises, and would obviously not 
follow if the ambiguity were eliminated. Consider the following example:  
“Professor Jones is a very bad professor. He must therefore be a very bad person.”  
Now assuming that we are not using “bad,” as some do, to mea n “good,” we are still using "bad" in two very 
different senses. In the first case, “bad” is used to mean something like, “not good at” or if you will, “not 
competent.” In the second case, “bad” is used as a term of moral appraisal. Clearly there is a mist ake in reasoning 
here; for just because one is bad at teaching it does not follow that the person is morally bad. In this argument, there 
is an equivocation on the term “bad” and the fallacy committed is thus the fallacy of equivocation.  
16. Accent  
 When speaking we can emphasize or accent a word or phrase and change its meaning. Consider this: 
“Woman, without her MAN would be lost.” It would seem that this might be the kind of thing that some country 
singer might croon. It certainly does not look like some thing that a feminist might embrace. From this claim we 
might well draw the conclusion that women need men. 
 
 Everything changes, however if we emphasize another of the words in this same statement. Consider this: 
“Woman, without HER, man would be lost.” F rom this we might well draw the conclusion that men need women, 
the very opposite conclusion from the first reading.  
It is this kind of ambiguity, generated by accenting words or phrases that  produces the fallacy of ACCENT.  
 And there are countless other examples. Consider this one: “We should be kind to our enemies.” What a 
difference an emphasis can make in this sentence. If we say “WE should be kind to our enemies,” we might be led 
to draw the conclusion that “they” are not under the same moral obligati on. And if we say, “We SHOULD be kind 
to our enemies,” this may be taken to imply that being kind to our enemies is only a recommendation. And if we 
emphasize OUR, or ENEMIES, the meaning changes as well, and mistaken conclusions can be drawn on the basis 
of this ambiguity of meaning.   
 There are two other ways that the fallacy of accent can be committed. First, in writing we might simply 
resort to small print in an effort to mislead people into drawing conclusions that are not warranted. We see this on 
motel signs: ROOMS: $50 and up .  And if we want to hide something in a contract we can always resort to putting it 
in what we call “fine print.” Such cases are instances of the fallacy of accent.  
 Secondly, we can accent something by pulling it out of context  and leading people to draw mistaken 
conclusions. For example, suppose that some movie critic said in a review of a movie “It would have been a great 
 
12 
 movie had the script been improved.” On the basis of this remark an advertising agent promoting the movie says: 
“Critics call it ‘…a great movie.’” This is the fallacy of accent.  
17. Amphiboly  
 Often ambiguities are generated by poor grammatical construction. Many cases of such poor construction 
involve syntax, or word or phrase order. The most common of thes e mistakes occurs when a modifying phrase or 
word is syntactically misplaced so that it modifies or qualifies some other word or phrase other than what it was 
intended to modify or qualify. Sometimes such words or phrases are called “dangling modifiers.” C onsider this 
example: “He left her at home with much regret.” This is ambiguous, for it is not clear whether he had “much 
regret” for leaving her at home, or if she, being left at home had much regret for being left. Here we have the 
fallacy of amphiboly. 
  
 More generally, any time that such poor or loose grammatical construction leads to ambiguities that in turn 
lead to unwarranted conclusions being drawn, we have the fallacy of amphiboly. Sometimes mistakes of this sort 
can be quite humorous. For example , a child comes to his mother and asks her: “What is a yet?”  And the mother 
replies that she does not know what he is talking about and further asks why he is asking that question. He replies 
that he just heard on the news that someone had been shot and t hat “the bullet was in her yet.” This is just a case of 
poor grammatical construction that generated the ambiguity that in turn led the young child to draw the mistaken 
conclusion that "yet" named a part of the human body. This confusion could have easily been avoided had the news 
reporter said something like “The bullet has yet to be removed from the victim.”   
18. Composition  
 Like the two fallacies of relevance, accident and hasty generalization, there are two fallacies of ambiguity 
that are mirror image s of one another. These are the fallacies of composition and division. Let's take the fallacy of 
composition first. This fallacy, like its cousin, division, involves ambiguities generated by confusing properties of 
wholes with properties of parts, and prop erties of individuals with properties of collections.  
 
 Consider first the ambiguity of a collection and individual members of that collection. Suppose someone 
claims: “Buses use more fuel than cars. Therefore it is not economical to use buses for public t ransportation.” The 
fact is that individual buses use more fuel than individual cars. As a collection, however, cars use more fuel than the 
collection of buses. Given that it takes more cars to transport the same amount of people that one bus can transport , 
it does not follow that it is not economical to use buses for public transportation. In fact, the opposite follows.  
 In general we will say that whenever we conclude, that because a particular member of a collection has a 
particular attribute, that the whole collection has that attribute as well, we have the fallacy of composition. In the 
example above, we committed this fallacy because we drew the conclusion that because individual buses use more 
fuel than individual cars, that the same thing is true of  the collection of buses vs. the collection of cars. This is 
simply a mistake in reasoning. Here we meet the fallacy of composition.  
 Now consider the ambiguity of wholes and parts.  Again, the fallacy of composition is committed when one 
concludes that be cause the parts have certain attributes that the whole has them as well. From the fact that each part 
of a certain machine is light in weight, it does not follow that the whole machine is light in weight. This should be 
clear.  
 
13 
 19. Division  
 Now let’s simpl y go in the other direction. When we conclude that because something is true of a collection 
or of a whole, it must follow that the same is true of the members of the collection or of the parts of the whole, we 
have a case of the fallacy of division. We can use our examples above in reverse order to illustrate this fallacy of 
division.  
 
 Because cars use more fuel than buses, it will be more economical for my colleague and I to take the school 
bus to the meeting rather than drive in my car. (Here, of cours e, the mistake is to think that what is true of the 
collection is also true of each member of the collection.) Because this machine is heavy, its parts must be heavy. 
(Again, what is true of the parts is not necessarily true of the whole.)  
 As I said, we m ust be careful not to confuse composition and division with accident and hasty 
generalization. In fact these two sets of fallacies are so closely related that there is some chance that they will be 
confused. To avoid this mistake, just remember this simple  distinction:  
A. Accident and Hasty Generalization: general rules and exceptions  
B. Composition and Division: wholes and parts or individuals and collections . 
 
 If you keep this distinction in mind, you will be less likely to confuse these two sets of fall acies. Even so, 
sometimes keeping these two sets of fallacies clearly distinguished is not easy to do. Consider the following 
argument:  
“Every third child born in New York City is a Roman Catholic. Therefore Protestants should have only two 
children.”  
 Now this humorous argument is definitely fallacious. But what is the fallacy? Arguably, we could say the 
fallacy is division, for what is true of the whole collection of children born in New York City, is not true of the 
children born in each individual famil y. It may also be plausible to say that the fallacy here is the fallacy of 
accident, at least if we reasoned as follows: while the generalization that “every third child born in New York City 
is a Roman Catholic” may be true, it does not follow that we can apply this generalization to every particular case. 
To complicate things a bit further, it is also plausible to say that this argument commits the fallacy of equivocation. 
Clearly the phrase “every third child” is used in two very different senses. In the one case it means simply “one 
third of the children born in the general population of New York City,” in the other it means, “the third child in a 
particular family.”  
 Again , the moral of this is to remind you that one and the same passage can commit more  than one fallacy.  
 Now it is time to have a go at identifying some fallacies of relevance and am biguity in the Workbook.  Just 
to keep you honest, there may be some passages in these examples that do not commit any fallacy at all. In this 
case, the correct  answer is, "no fallacy."  
 
 
14 
 STUDY GUIDE  
Chapter 4  – Identifying Fallacies  
Fallacies of Relevance  
Ignorance:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of a lack of evidence.  
Pity: Committed when an attempt is made to justify a  conclusion on the basis of pity.  
Desire:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of a desire that it is true.  
Authority : Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an appeal to   authority.  
Begging the Question: Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of a premise that is a 
disguised version of the conclusion   
Character- Abusive : Committed when a conclusion is discredited on the basis of an attack of the charact er of the one 
making the argument. For example: “You must ignore his evidence.  He is a thief.”   
Character- Circumstantial : Committed when a conclusion is discredited on the basis of the special circumstances of 
the one making the argument.  For example, “ His conclusion that abortion is wrong is not convincing because he is a 
Roman Catholic priest.”  
Complex Question:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an appeal to a question 
that contains a concealed assumption. For ex ample, “Have you stopped beating your wife?”  This question assumes that 
you have beaten your wife.    
False Cause : Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of assuming that one event is the 
cause of another when in fact the e vents are not causally related at all.    
Popularity:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an appeal to popular opinion. 
For example, “Everybody is doing it, so it is something I am justified in doing.”    
Force:  Commit ted whenever an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of a threat, veiled or explicit.   
Hasty Generalization:  (Converse Accident) Committed when an attempt is made to justify a generalized conclusion 
on the basis of an appeal to exceptional  or limited cases. For example, arguing that because lying is morally permissible 
(perhaps to save a life) that all lying is morally permissible.  
Accident:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an appeal to a general rule that 
does not fit an exceptional circumstance. It does not follow, for example, that because generally one should tell the 
truth, that one should tell the truth in every circumstance.  
Irrelevant Conclusion:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an appeal to 
premises that do not in fact support the conclusion they are offered in support of, but another conclusion that is not at 
issue and is often readily agreed to.   
  
Fallacies of Ambiguity  
Equivocation:  Committed whe n an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an ambiguity caused by 
using a word or phrase that occurs in the argument in two different senses.   
Amphiboly:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an ambiguity caused by poor 
grammatical construction, usually in the form of a “dangling modifier.”  
Accent:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an ambiguity caused by 
emphasizing or de -emphasizing a word or phrase in an argume nt, or by taking a word or phrase out of context. 
Composition:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an ambiguity between the 
properties of the whole and its parts or between a collection and it members. This fallacy occ urs when an inference is 
made that the whole or collection has a certain property because its parts or members have that property.  
Division:  Committed when an attempt is made to justify a conclusion on the basis of an ambiguity between the 
properties of th e whole and its parts or between a collection and it members. This fallacy occurs when the inference is 
made that because the whole or collection has a certain property, its parts or members must also have it.  
 