Macroeconomic Policy and Poverty Reduction 
The IMF's Poverty Reduction and Growth FacilityA Factsheet 
 
Prepared by the International Monetary Fund and the World BankAugust 20011. Introduction2. The Links Between Macroeconomic Policy
and Poverty Reduction: Growth MattersMacroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorComposition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterImplications for Macroeconomic Policy3. Macroeconomic Stability and Economic GrowthSources of InstabilityStabilizationElements of Macroeconomic Stability4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic Policies
and Poverty OutcomesFinancing Poverty Reduction StrategiesFiscal PolicyMonetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesPolicies to Insulate the Poor Against ShocksReferencesBoxes1. Definition and Measurement of Poverty2. Macroeconomic Stability3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic Policies4. Tax Policy5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission ChannelsTables1. Real GDP Growth2. GDP Deflator3. Primary SurplusFigures1. Financing Poverty Reduction Strategies in a Sustainable
Manner 
 
1. Introduction2. The Links Between Macroeconomic Policy
and Poverty Reduction: Growth MattersMacroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorComposition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterImplications for Macroeconomic Policy3. Macroeconomic Stability and Economic GrowthSources of InstabilityStabilizationElements of Macroeconomic Stability4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic Policies
and Poverty OutcomesFinancing Poverty Reduction StrategiesFiscal PolicyMonetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesPolicies to Insulate the Poor Against ShocksReferencesBoxes1. Definition and Measurement of Poverty2. Macroeconomic Stability3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic Policies4. Tax Policy5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission ChannelsTables1. Real GDP Growth2. GDP Deflator3. Primary SurplusFigures1. Financing Poverty Reduction Strategies in a Sustainable
Manner 
 
1. Introduction 
 
2. The Links Between Macroeconomic Policy
and Poverty Reduction: Growth Matters 
 
Macroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorComposition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterImplications for Macroeconomic Policy 
 
3. Macroeconomic Stability and Economic Growth 
 
Sources of InstabilityStabilizationElements of Macroeconomic Stability 
 
4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic Policies
and Poverty Outcomes 
 
Financing Poverty Reduction StrategiesFiscal PolicyMonetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesPolicies to Insulate the Poor Against Shocks 
 
References 
 
Boxes1. Definition and Measurement of Poverty2. Macroeconomic Stability3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic Policies4. Tax Policy5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission Channels 
 
Tables1. Real GDP Growth2. GDP Deflator3. Primary Surplus 
 
Figures1. Financing Poverty Reduction Strategies in a Sustainable
Manner 
 
1. IntroductionPoverty is a multidimensional problem that goes beyond economics to include,
among other things, social, political, and cultural issues (see
Box 1). Therefore, solutions to poverty cannot be based exclusively
on economic policies, but require a comprehensive set of well-coordinated
measures. Indeed, this is the foundation for the rationale underlying
comprehensive poverty reduction strategies.1So why focus on macroeconomic issues? Because economic growth is the single
most important factor influencing poverty, and macroeconomic stability
is essential for high and sustainable rates of growth.2Hence, macroeconomic stability should be a key component of any poverty
reduction strategy.Macroeconomic stability by itself, however, does not ensure high rates
of economic growth. In most cases, sustained high rates of growth also
depend upon key structural measures, such as regulatory reform, privatization,
civil service reform, improved governance, trade liberalization, and banking
sector reform, many of which are discussed at length in thePoverty
Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, published by the World Bank.3Moreover, growth alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction. Growth
associated with progressive distributional changes will have a greater
impact on poverty than growth that leaves distribution unchanged. Hence,
policies that improve the distribution of income and assets within a society,
such as land tenure reform, pro-poor public expenditure, and measures
to increase the poor’s access to financial markets, will also form
essential elements of a country’s poverty reduction strategy.4Box 1. Definition and Measurement of PovertyThe World Bank’s 2000 World Development Report defines
poverty as an unacceptable deprivation in human well-being
that can comprise both physiological and social deprivation.
Physiological deprivation involves the non-fulfillment of
basic material or biological needs, including inadequate nutrition,
health, education, and shelter. A person can be considered
poor if he or she is unable to secure the goods and services
to meet these basic material needs. The concept of physiological
deprivation is thus closely related to, but can extend beyond,
low monetary income and consumption levels. Social deprivation
widens the concept of deprivation to include risk, vulnerability,
lack of autonomy, powerlessness, and lack of self-respect.
Given that countries’ definitions of deprivation often
go beyond physiological deprivation and sometimes give greater
weight to social deprivation, local populations (including
poor communities) should be engaged in the dialogue that leads
to the most appropriate definition of poverty in a country.To safeguard macroeconomic stability, the government budget, including
the country’s poverty reduction strategies, must be financed in a
sustainable, noninflationary manner. The formulation and integration of
a country’s macroeconomic policy and poverty reduction strategy are
iterative processes. Poverty reduction strategies need first to be articulated
(i.e., objectives and policies specified), then costed, and finally financed
within the overall budget in a noninflationary manner. The amount of finance,
much of which will be on concessional terms, is, however, not necessarily
fixed during this process: if credible poverty reduction strategies cannot
be financed from available resources, World Bank and IMF staff should
and will actively assist countries in their efforts to raise additional
financial support from the donor community. Nonetheless, in situations
where financing gaps remain, a country would have to revisit the intermediate
objectives of their strategy and reexamine their priorities. Except in
cases where macroeconomic imbalances are severe, there will usually be
some scope for flexibility in setting short-term macroeconomic targets.
However, the objective of macroeconomic stability should not be compromised.2. The Links Between Macroeconomic
Policy and Poverty Reduction: Growth MattersEconomic growth is thesingle most important factorinfluencing
poverty. Numerous statistical studies have found a strong association
between national per capita income and national poverty indicators, using
both income and nonincome measures of poverty.5One recent study consisting of 80 countries covering four decades found
that, on average, the income of the bottom one-fifth of the population
rose one-for-one with the overall growth of the economy as defined by
per capita GDP (Dollar and Kraay, 2000). Moreover, the study found that
the effect of growth on the income of the poor was on average no different
in poor countries than in rich countries, that the poverty–growth
relationship had not changed in recent years, and that policy-induced
growth was as good for the poor as it was for the overall population.
Another study that looked at 143 growth episodes also found that the “growth
effect” dominated, with the “distribution effect” being
important in only a minority of cases (White and Anderson, forthcoming).
These studies, however, establish association, but not causation. In fact,
the causality could well go the other way. In such cases, poverty reduction
could in fact be necessary to implement stable macroeconomic policies
or to achieve higher growth.Studies show that capital accumulation by the private sector drives growth.6Therefore, a key objective of a country’s poverty reduction strategy
should be to establish conditions that facilitate private sector investment.
No magic bullet can guarantee increased rates of private sector investment.
Instead, in addition to a sustainable and stable set of macroeconomic
policies, a country’s poverty reduction policy agenda should, in
most cases, extend across a variety of policy areas, including privatization,
trade liberalization, banking and financial sector reforms, labor markets,
the regulatory environment, and the judicial system. The agenda will certainly
include increased and more efficient public investment in a country’s
health, education, and other priority social service sectors.7Macroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic stability is the cornerstone of any successful effort to
increase private sector development and economic growth (see
Box 2). Cross-country regressions using a large sample of countries
suggest that growth, investment, and productivity are positively correlated
with macroeconomic stability (Easterly and Kraay, 1999). Although it is
difficult to prove the direction of causation, these results confirm thatmacroeconomic instability has generally been associated with poor growth
performance. Without macroeconomic stability, domestic and foreign
investors will stay away and resources will be diverted elsewhere. In
fact, econometric evidence of investment behavior indicates that in addition
to conventional factors (i.e., past growth of economic activity, real
interest rates, and private sector credit), private investment is significantly
and negatively influenced by uncertainty and macroeconomic instability
(see, for example, Ramey and Ramey, 1995).Box 2. Macroeconomic StabilityMacroeconomic stability exists when key economic relationships
are in balance—for example, between domestic demand and
output, the balance of payments, fiscal revenues and expenditure,
and savings and investment. These relationships, however,
need not necessarily be in exact balance. Imbalances such
as fiscal and current account deficits or surpluses are perfectly
compatible with economic stability provided that they can
be financed in a sustainable manner.There is no unique set of thresholds for each macroeconomic
variable between stability and instability. Rather, there
is a continuum of various combinations of levels of key macroeconomic
variables (e.g., growth, inflation, fiscal deficit, current
account deficit, international reserves) that could indicate
macroeconomic instability. While it may be relatively easy
to identify a country in a state of macroeconomic instability
(e.g., large current account deficits financed by short-term
borrowing, high and rising levels of public debt, double-digit
inflation rates, and stagnant or declining GDP) or stability
(e.g., current account and fiscal balances consistent with
low and declining debt levels, inflation in the low single
digits, and rising per capita GDP), there is a substantial
“gray area” in between where countries enjoy a degree
of stability, but where macroeconomic performance could clearly
be improved.Finally, macroeconomic stability depends not only on the
macroeconomic management of an economy, but also on the structure
of key markets and sectors. To enhance macroeconomic stability,
countries need to support macroeconomic policy with structural
reforms that strengthen and improve the functioning of these
markets and sectors.Macroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorIn addition to low (and sometimes even negative) growth rates, other
aspects of macroeconomic instability can place a heavy burden on the poor.
Inflation, for example, is a regressive and arbitrary tax, the burden
of which is typically borne disproportionately by those in lower income
brackets. The reason is twofold. First, the poor tend to hold most of
their financial assets in the form of cash rather than in interest-bearing
assets. Second, they are generally less able than are the better off to
protect the real value of their incomes and assets from inflation. In
consequence, price jumps generally erode the real wages and assets of
the poor more than those of the non-poor. Moreover, beyond certain thresholds,
inflation also curbs output growth, an effect that will impact even those
among the poor who infrequently use money for economic transactions.8In addition, low output growth that is typically associated with instability
can have a longer-term impact on poverty (a phenomenon known as “hysteresis”).
This phenomenon typically operates through shocks to the human capital
of the poor. In Africa, for instance, there is evidence that children
from poor families drop out of school during crises. Similarly, studies
for Latin American countries suggest that adverse terms-of-trade shocks
explain part of the decline of schooling attainment (see, for example,
Behrman, Duryea, and Szeleky, 1999).Composition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterAlthough economic growth is the engine of poverty reduction, it works
more effectively in some situations than in others.9Two key factors that appear to determine the impact of growth on poverty
are thedistributional patternsand thesectoral compositionof growth.If the benefits of growth are translated into poverty reduction through
the existing distribution of income, then more equal societies will bemore efficient transformers of growth into poverty reduction. A
number of empirical studies have found that the responsiveness of income
poverty to growth increases significantly as inequality is lowered.10This is also supported by a recent cross-country study that found that
the more equal the distribution of income in a country, the greater the
impact of growth on the number of people in poverty (Ravallion, 1997).
Others have suggested that greater equity comes at the expense of lower
growth and that there is a trade-off between growth and equity when it
comes to poverty reduction.11A large number
of recent empirical studies, however, have found that there is not necessarily
such a trade-off12and that equity in its
various dimensions is growth enhancing.13Thesectoral compositionof growth can determine the impact that
growth will have on poverty. Conventional wisdom has been that growth
in sectors of the economy where the poor are concentrated will have a
greater impact on reducing poverty than growth in other sectors—indeed,
this is almost a tautology. For example, it is often argued that in countries
where most of the poor live in rural areas, agricultural growth reduces
poverty because it generates income for poor farmers and increases the
demand for goods and services that can easily be produced by the poor.14Various country-specific and cross-country studies have shown that growth
in the agricultural and tertiary sectors has had a major effect on reducing
poverty, while growth in manufacturing has not.15This reinforces the case for duty-free access to industrial country markets
for agricultural exports from low-income countries. The links may be more
complex over the long run, however. While faster growth in agriculture
may address rural poverty in the short-term, reliance on agricultural
activity may also intensify output variability, which, in turn, would
contribute to increasing rather than decreasing poverty. A more diversified
economy with a vibrant manufacturing sector might offer the best chances
for a sustainable improvement in living standards in the long run.What are the implications of these empirical findings for macroeconomic
policy? First, in light of the importance of growth for poverty reduction,
and of macroeconomic stability for growth, the broad objective of macroeconomic
policy should be the establishment, or strengthening, of macroeconomic
stability. Policymakers should therefore define a set of attainable macroeconomic
targets (i.e., growth, inflation, external debt, and net international
reserves) with the objective of maintaining macroeconomic stability, and
pursue macroeconomic policies (fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate) consistent
with those targets. In cases where macroeconomic imbalances are less severe,
a range of possible targets may be consistent with the objective of stabilization.
Precise targets can then be set within that range, in accordance with
the goals and priorities in the country’s poverty reduction strategy
(see the section on fiscal policy later in this pamphlet).Second, most developing countries will likely have substantial scope
for enhancing the quality of growth, that is, the degree to which the
poor share in the fruits of such growth, through policies aimed at improving
income distribution. These policies (e.g., land tenure reform, changes
in marginal and average tax rates, increases in pro-poor social spending,
etc.) often are politically charged, and usually require supporting structural
and governance reforms that would empower the poor to demand resources
and/or ensure that resources intended for them are not diverted to other
groups of the population. As these topics pertain more broadly to political
economy, rather than exclusively to macroeconomics, they are beyond the
scope of this pamphlet. But they reinforce the point that economic growth
alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction and that complementary redistributional
policies may be needed to ensure that the poor benefit from growth.Finally, while issues regarding the composition of growth also go beyond
strict macroeconomics, several general policy observations can be made.
There is a general consensus that policies that introduce distortions
in order to influence growth in a particular sector can hamper overall
growth. The industrial policies pursued by many African developing countries
in the 1960s have long been discredited (World Bank, 1982). Instead, strategies
for sector specific growth should focus on removing distortions that impede
growth in a particular sector. In addition, policymakers should implement
policies that will empower the poor and create the conditions that would
permit them to move into new as well as existing areas of opportunity,
thereby allowing them to better share in the fruits of economic growth.
The objectives of such policies should include creating a stable environment
and level playing field conducive to private sector investment and broad-based
economic growth; removing the cultural, social, and economic constraints
that prevent the poor from making full use of their existing asset base
and accessing markets; and increasing the human capital base of the poor
through the provision of basic health and education services. Using these
policies, and the redistributive policies described above, policymakers
can target “pro-poor” growth—that is, they can attempt
to maximize the beneficial impact of sustained economic growth on poverty
reduction.3. Macroeconomic Stability
and Economic GrowthBroadly speaking, two considerations underlie macroeconomic policy recommendations.
First, there needs to be anassessment of the appropriate policystance to adopt in a given set of circumstances (i.e., should fiscal and/or
monetary policy be tightened or loosened?). Second, there is thechoice
of specific macroeconomic policy instrumentsthat would be beneficial
for a country to adopt (e.g., the use of a nominal anchor, a value-added
tax (VAT), etc.). In practice, these two considerations are closely linked.
Adjusting a policy stance is often done via the adoption of a new instrument
(or the modification of an existing one). More important, both considerations
are essential to efforts to enhance an economy’s stability.The specific stance must fit each country’s particular situation.
These situations can be put into three broad classes: (1) instability/disequilibrium;
(2) stabilization (e.g., transition from instability to stability); and
(3) stability/steady economic growth. This Section briefly discusses how
macroeconomic policies can contribute to stability. For countries that
enjoy stable macroeconomic conditions, there is somewhat greater flexibility
in the choice of appropriate stance for macroeconomic policy. The central
issue for these countries will be to ensure that the financing of their
poverty reduction strategies does not jeopardize macroeconomic stability,
which will be discussed in the last section of this pamphlet.Sources of InstabilityThere are two main sources of economic instability, namely exogenous
shocks and inappropriate policies. Exogenous shocks (e.g., terms of trade
shocks, natural disasters, reversals in capital flows, etc.) can throw
an economy into disequilibrium and require compensatory action. For example,
many low income countries have a narrow export base, often centered on
one or two key commodities. Shocks to the world price of these commodities
can therefore have a strong impact on the country’s income. Even
diversified economies, however, are routinely hit by exogenous shocks,
although, reflecting their greater diversification, shocks usually need
to be particularly large or long-lasting to destabilize such an economy.
Alternatively, a disequilibrium can be “self-induced” by poor
macroeconomic management. For example, an excessively loose fiscal stance
can increase aggregate demand for goods and services, which places pressure
on the country’s external balance of payments as well as on the domestic
price level. At times, economic crises are the result of both external
shocks and poor management.StabilizationIn most cases, addressing instability (i.e., stabilization) will require
policyadjustment; whereby a government introduces new measures
(possibly combined with new policy targets) in response to the change
in circumstances.16Adjustment will typically
be necessary if the source of instability is a permanent (i.e., systemic)
external shock or the result of earlier, inappropriate macroeconomic policies.
However, if the source of instability can be clearly identified as a temporary
shock (e.g., a one-time event) then it may be appropriate for a country
to accommodate it.17Identifying whether
a particular shock is temporary or is likely to persist is easier said
than done. Since there is often a considerable degree of uncertainty surrounding
such a judgment, it is usually wise to err somewhat on the side of caution
by assuming that the shock will largely persist and by basing the corresponding
policy response on the appropriate adjustment.In most circumstances where adjustment is necessary, both monetary (or
exchange rate) and fiscal instruments will have to be used. In particular,
successful adjustment to a permanent unfavorable shock that worsens the
balance of payments will often require a sustained tightening of the fiscal
stance, as this is the most immediate and effective way to increase domestic
savings and to reduce domestic demand—two objectives typically at
the center of stabilization programs.Adjustment policies may contribute to a temporary contraction of economic
activity, but this contingency should not be used to argue against implementing
adjustment policies altogether, as the alternative may be worse. Attempting
to sustain aggregate demand through unsustainable policies will almost
certainly aggravate the long-run cost of a shock, and could even fail
in the short run to the extent that it undermines confidence. In the long
run, greater benefits to the poor are to be had as a result of the restoration
of macroeconomic stability. The appropriate policies to protect the poor
during adjustment are to maintain, or even increase, social expenditures
and to adopt, where feasible, compensatory measures that would insulate
or offset temporary adverse impacts to the fullest extent possible.18This is best done by devoting resources to the establishment of effective
social safety nets,19as an enduring part
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy, rather than as a response
to crisis. Countries that lack such resources/safety nets could be forced
to either subject their poor to the short-term adverse effects of stabilization
or to delay the pace with which macroeconomic adjustment proceeds (and
put off the corresponding long-term benefits to economic growth and poverty
reduction).Countries in macroeconomic crisis typically have little choice but to
stabilize quickly, but for countries in the “gray” area of partial
stability, finding the right pace may prove difficult. In some cases,
a lack of financing will drive the pace of stabilization. Where financing
is not a constraint, however, policymakers will need to assess and carefully
weigh various factors on a case-by-case basis in choosing the most appropriate
pace of stabilization.Elements of Macroeconomic StabilityMacroeconomic policies influence and contribute to the attainment of
rapid, sustainable economic growth aimed at poverty reduction in a variety
of ways. By pursuing sound economic policies, policymakers send clear
signals to the private sector. The extent to which policymakers are able
to establish atrack record of policy implementationwill influence
private sector confidence, which will, in turn, impact upon investment,
economic growth, and poverty outcomes.Prudent macroeconomic policies can result inlow and stable inflation.
Inflation hurts the poor by lowering growth and by redistributing real
incomes and wealth to the detriment of those in society least able to
defend their economic interests. High inflation can also introduce high
volatility in relative prices and make investment a risky decision. Unless
inflation starts at very high levels, rapid disinflation can also have
short-run output costs, which need to be weighed against the costs of
continuing inflation.By moving towarddebt sustainability, policymakers will help create
the conditions for steady and continuous progress on growth and poverty
reduction by removing uncertainty as to whether a government will be able
to service new debt. By keeping domestic and external debt at levels that
can be serviced in a sustainable manner without unduly squeezing nondebt
expenditure, policymakers can also ensure that adequate domestic resources
are available to finance essential social programs.Inappropriate exchange rate policies distort the composition of growth
by influencing the price of tradable versus nontradable goods. Household
survey data for a number of countries indicate that the poor tend to consume
higher amounts of nontradable goods while generating relatively more of
their income from tradable goods (Sahn, Dorosh, and Younger, 1997). Hence,
in addition to distorting trade and inhibiting growth, an overly appreciated
exchange rate can impair the relative incomes and purchasing power of
the poor.By building and maintaining anadequate level of net international
reserves, a country can weather a temporary shock without having to
reduce essential pro-poor spending. External shocks can be particularly
detrimental to the poor because they can lower real wages, increase unemployment,
reduce nonlabor income, and limit private and net government transfers.
The level of “adequate” reserves depends on the choice of exchange
rate regime.4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic
Policies and Poverty OutcomesSince the emphasis of this pamphlet is on the role of macroeconomic policy
in supporting a country’s poverty reduction strategy, the discussion
of macroeconomic policies in this section focuses on countries that have
broadly achieved macroeconomic stability. Recent data indicate that many
developing countries are presently in a state of macroeconomic stability
(seeTables 1–3at the end of this pamphlet). When
formulating a country’s poverty reduction strategy, policymakers
will need to assess and determine what is the most appropriate combination
of key macroeconomic targets that would preserve macroeconomic stability
in their particular circumstance. Three key issues are discussed in this
section: (1) how to finance poverty-reducing spending in a way that doesn’t
endanger macroeconomic stability; (2) what specific policies can be adopted
to improve macroeconomic performance; and (3) policies to protect the
poor from domestic and external shocks.Financing Poverty Reduction StrategiesOnce a country has developed a comprehensive and fully costed draft of
its poverty reduction strategy, it will need to ensure that the strategy
can be pursued and financed in a manner that does not jeopardize its macroeconomic
stability and growth objectives.20To do
so, policymakers need to integrate their poverty reduction and macroeconomic
strategies into a consistent framework. The following paragraphs present
a conceptual framework that could be useful to policymakers in determining
whether their poverty reduction strategy is consistent with their macroeconomic
objectives.Given that it is difficult to determine beforehand what the growth target
should be, policymakers may wish to consider developing alternative macroeconomic
scenarios that take into consideration possible variations in the rate
of economic growth. Such scenarios could be usefully discussed with stakeholders
and development partners with a view to assessing the impact of lower-than-projected
economic growth on key macroeconomic targets and poverty outcomes and
to developing appropriate contingencies. The most likely or “base
case” scenario would then be used as the basis for carrying out an
initial attempt aimed at integrating the macroeconomic and poverty reduction
strategies into a consistent framework. Once this has been accomplished,
similar exercises could be carried out regarding the other contingency
scenarios for reference during the implementation stage of the strategy.Figure 1shows the various macroeconomic linkages
and constraints within a country and highlights the main trade-offs facing
policymakers. The starting point is theinitial articulation of the
country’s poverty reduction strategy, based on discussions with
representatives of the government, stakeholders, and development partners.
Ideally, these discussions will have resulted in the development of a
comprehensive action plan that identifies priority sectoral policies to
be pursued in support of poverty reduction, including in the areas of
education, health, and rural infrastructure. Given that poverty is multidimensional,
the action plan will also likely include priority measures with regard
to governance, structural reform, and other relevant areas, each of which
may have budgetary implications.The first step will be to provide afull costing of the envisaged
poverty reduction strategy. A comprehensive system for budget formulation
of poverty reduction strategies requires the development of Medium-Term
Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF), which currently exist in only a limited
number of countries (e.g., Ghana and Uganda). Details regarding how such
costing exercises can be carried out are presented in Chapter 5 of thePoverty Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, “Public Spending for
Poverty Reduction”.21The second step involves an assessment of the government’s spending
program with regard to priority spending, nondiscretionary spending, and
discretionary nonpriority spending. In doing so, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas and away from nonproductive, nonpriority spending, as well as from
areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist.The third step involves an assessment of domestic and external sources
of budget finance. This would include a review of (1) the existing tax
and nontax revenue base, in-cluding the effect of any changes in the tax
system envisaged under the poverty reduction strategy; (2) the scope for
financing public spending through net domestic borrowing in light of the
need to maintain macroeconomic stability and to ensure adequate availability
of credit to the private sector in support of private sector development
and economic growth; and (3) the scope for external financing (e.g., grants,
net external borrowing, and debt relief) that is realistic and sustainable
under the present circumstances.Once policymakers have carried out these assessments, they can then determine
whether the desired poverty reduction strategy can be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s growth and stability objectives. In
this regard, it is important to note that there are no rigid, pre-determined
limits regarding a country’s fiscal stance (such as, for example,
“the budget deficit must not be more than ‘x’ percent of
GDP”). Rather, arriving at an appropriate, integrated poverty reduction
and macroeconomic framework will require juggling a large number of parameters
and weighing the trade-offs between multiple objectives. The linkages
inFigure 1are meant to illustrate that this is an
iterative process. In this regard, quantitative frameworks that could
assist policymakers in assessing the distributional implications of their
macroeconomic policies would be particularly useful. Such frameworks,
however, are presently only at a nascent stage of development (seeBox
3).Box 3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic PoliciesIn developing poverty reduction strategies, policymakers
would benefit from a quantitative framework that they could
use to assess the distributional impact of the macroeconomic
policy options under consideration. Such a framework would
be useful because the links between macroeconomic policies
and poverty are complex. A quantitative framework that identifies
the critical relationships on which the outcome depends could
therefore assist countries in assessing these trade-offs.What would be some of the desirable characteristics of such
a quantitative framework? First, the framework should be capable
of identifying some of the critical trade-offs in poverty-reducing
macroeconomic policies. For example, how do the costs (in
terms of poverty) of higher spending (and higher fiscal deficits)
compare with the benefits of targeting that spending on the
poor? Second, the framework should be consistent with economic
theory on the one hand, and with basic data availability,
such as national accounts and household income and expenditure
surveys, on the other. Otherwise, the frameworks will not
be able to foster a dialogue between conflicting parties on
these issues. Third, and most important, the framework should
be simple enough that government officials can use it on their
desktop computers. This means that it should not make undue
demands on data, and it should be based on readily available
software, such as Microsoft ExcelTM.World Bank staff is presently developing alternative quantitative
frameworks that could be used to evaluate some of the macroeconomic
aspects of poverty reduction strategies.1It is expected that
other possible quantitative frameworks will be developed over
time that could assist country teams in this regard.1See Agenor and others (2000). In developing
this particular framework, the authors opted for a modular
approach that allows different models to be incorporated as
alternative sub-components of the overall framework.If there remains an imbalance between spending and expected financing
that could jeopardize the country’s macroeconomic growth and stability
objective, one option would be to ascertain the extent to which additional
external financing may be available. But, as discussed earlier, policymakers
would need to assess the extent to which accommodating such expenditure
could place pressure on the price of nontraded goods and jeopardize stability.
Since the development of a poverty reduction strategy involves a participatory
process that includes the country’s development partners, the case
for additional donor support can be examined. To the extent possible,
donors should be encouraged to make medium-term aid commitments in support
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy so that the country can
have confidence as it begins new spending programs that these activities
can be sustained.22If the desired poverty reduction program cannot be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s economic stability and growth objectives,
then policymakers will need to reconsider the parameters discussed above.
Key questions would include: Is there further scope for domestic revenue
mobilization? Can discretionary nonpriority spending be cut back more?
Is there scope for cutting back certain priority spending without undermining
the poverty reduction objective? Can the domestic financing target be
relaxed without jeopardizing macroeconomic stability or private sector
development objectives? Can the macroeconomic targets be modified in a
manner that would not undermine the interrelated objectives of rapid economic
growth, low and stable inflation, and poverty reduction? The answers to
these questions will determine the extent to which the desired poverty
reduction programs can be pursued in the current period.Fiscal PolicyFiscal policy can have a direct impact on the poor, both through the
government’s overall fiscal stance and through the distributional
implications of tax policy and public spending. Structural fiscal reforms
in budget and treasury management, public administration, governance,
transparency, and accountability can also benefit the poor in terms of
more efficient and better targeted use of public resources. As indicated
above, there is no rigid, pre-determined limit on what would be an appropriate
fiscal deficit. An assessment would need to be based on the particular
circumstances facing the country, its medium-term macroeconomic outlook,
and the scope for external budgetary assistance. The terms on which external
assistance is available are also important. There is a strong case, for
instance, for allowing higher grants to translate into higher spending
and deficits, to the extent that those grants can reasonably be expected
to continue in the future, and provided that the resources can be used
effectively.With regard to the composition of public expenditure, policymakers will
need to assess not only the appropriateness of the proposed poverty reduction
spending program, but also of planned nondiscretionary, and discretionary
nonpriority, spending. In so doing, they will need to take into particular
consideration the distributional and growth impact of spending in each
area and place due emphasis on spending programs that are pro-poor (e.g.,
certain programs in health, education, and infrastructure) and on the
efficient delivery of essential public services (e.g., public health,
public education, social welfare, etc.). In examining these expenditures,
policymakers should evaluate the extent to which government intervention
in general, and public spending in particular, can be justified on grounds
of market failure and/or redistribution.Policymakers must also ask themselves whether the envisaged public goods
or services can be delivered efficiently (e.g., targeted at the intended
beneficiaries) and, if not, whether appropriate mechanisms and/or incentives
can be put in place to ensure such efficient delivery. Countries should
begin by assessing in a frank manner their administrative capacity at
both the national and subnational levels to deliver well-targeted, essential
public services in support of poverty reduction. In this regard, policymakers
should consider the extent to which both technical assistance and the
private sector can play a role in improving the delivery of these services.In the context of medium-term budget planning, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas23and away from nonproductive spending,
including areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist.
Operation and maintenance expenditure tied to capital spending should
also be reviewed with a critical eye. The quality of public expenditure
could be assessed in the context of a public expenditure review with the
assistance of multilateral and/or bilateral donors. Policymakers could
then assess the new poverty reduction projects and activities that have
been identified in the context of the poverty reduction strategy and integrate
them into the preliminary spending program. In so doing, they should attempt
to rank the poverty programs in order of relative importance in line with
the country’s social and economic priorities, the market failure/redistribution
criteria identified above, and the country’s absorptive capacity
in the light of existing institutional and administrative constraints.
If spending cuts are deemed necessary in the context of the integrated
poverty reduction/macroeconomic framework, policymakers should refer back
to the ranking of the spending program based on the relative importance
and priority assigned to each activity.A key aspect of any poverty reduction strategy will be an assessment
of the impact of the present tax and nontax system on the poor. An important
medium-term objective for many developing countries will be to raise domestic
revenue levels with a view to providing additional revenue in support
of their poverty reduction strategies.24The existing revenue base should be reviewed relative to its capacity
to provide for the poverty spending requirements from nonbank domestic
financing. Revenues should be raised in as economically neutral a manner
as possible, while taking into consideration equity concerns and administrative
capacities (see Box 4).In a developing country , taking account of allocational effects means
that the tax system in particular should not attempt to affect savings
and investment—experience indicates that aggregate savings and investment
tend to be insensitive to taxes, with the result that the tax system typically
only affects the allocation of those aggregates across alternative forms.
As regards equity, the tax system should be assessed with respect to its
direct and indirect impact on the poor. It is difficult to have a tax
system that is both efficient and progressive, particularly in those countries
without a well-developed tax administration. Therefore, governments should
seek to determine a distribution of tax burdens seen as broadly fair rather
than use the tax system to achieve a drastic income redistribution.Box 4. Tax PolicyThe best tax systems typically include most or all of the
following elements:A broad-based consumption tax, such as a VAT, preferably
with a single rate, minimal exemptions, and a threshold
to exclude smaller enterprises from taxation. The VAT generally
should extend through the retail sector, and should apply
equally to domestic production and imported goods and services.
The VAT should cover agricultural products and inputs, subject
to the threshold, which will exclude small farmers.Excise taxesshould apply to petroleum products,
alcohol, and tobacco; should be collected at the point of
production or import; and should apply equally to domestic
production and imports.Taxes on international tradeshould play a minimal
role. Import tariffs should have a low average rate and
a limited dispersion of rates, to reduce arbitrary and excessive
rates of protection. Exemptions should be kept at a minimum
and nontariff barriers should be avoided altogether. Exporters
should have duties rebated on imported inputs used for producing
exports and export duties should generally be avoided.The personal income taxshould be characterized
by only a few brackets and a moderate top marginal rate,
by limited personal exemptions and deductions, by a standard
exemption that excludes persons with low incomes, and by
extensive use of final withholding.The corporate income taxshould be levied at one
moderate rate. Depreciation allowances should be uniform
across sectors, and there should be minimal use of tax incentives
other than permitting net operating losses to be carried
forward for some reasonable period of time.The use of a simplified regime for small businesses and the
informal sector may complement these major taxes. Real property
taxes may also be used if they can be administered appropriately,
though this may be difficult in developing countries.Tax policy should aim at moving toward a system of easily administered
taxes with broad bases and moderate marginal rates. To the extent that
some revenue provisions may be regressive, they should be offset through
the expenditure system (e.g., transitory, well-targeted food subsidies
could offset the impact of a broad-based consumption tax and cushion the
adverse impact of adjustment policies on the poor). Finally, where revenue
systems are being administered by a civil service that is highly constrained
in terms of human resources, technical support, and funding, countries
should rely heavily on final withholding, and keep to the absolute minimum
any exemptions, special provisions, or multiple rates.The scope for domestic budgetary financing will depend on a number of
factors, including the sustainable rate of monetary growth, the credit
requirements of the private sector, the relative productivity of public
investment, and the desired target for net international reserves. Sacrificing
low inflation (through faster monetary growth) to finance additional expenditure
is generally not an effective means to reduce poverty because the poor
are most vulnerable to price increases. At the same time, since private
sector development stands at the center of any poverty reduction strategy,
governments need to take into account the extent to which public sector
borrowing “crowds out” the private sector’s access to credit,
thereby undermining the country’s growth and inflation objectives.
At times, public sector borrowing can also “crowd in” private
sector investment by putting in place critical infrastructure necessary
for private enterprise to flourish. Given that at any point in time there
is a finite amount of credit available in an economy, policymakers must
therefore assess the relative productivity of public investment versus
private investment and determine the amount of domestic budgetary financing
that would be consistent with the need to maintain low inflation and support
sustainable economic growth.The amount and type of available external resources to finance the budget
will vary depending on the particular circumstances facing the country.
Countries that have access to external grants need to consider what amount
is available and sustainable under the present circumstances. The same
is true in the case of external debt, but policymakers also need to determine
whether the terms on such borrowing are appropriate and whether the added
debt burden is sustainable. To the extent that a country is benefiting
from, or may benefit from, external debt relief under the enhanced Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, net resource flows—flows
that are predictable over the medium term—will be freed up to finance
poverty-related budgetary expenditure. Domestic debt reduction could also
represent a viable use of additional concessional foreign assistance,
since it would both free up government resources to be directed at priority
poverty expenditure, as well as free up additional domestic credit for
use by the private sector.There may be a limit to the amount of additional external financing that
a country would deem to be appropriate, however. For example, there may
be absorptive capacity constraints that could drive up domestic wages
and prices, as well as appreciate the exchange rate and render the country’s
exports less competitive, thereby threatening both stability and growth.
The extent of such pressures will depend on how much of the additional
aid is spent on imports versus domestic nontraded goods and services.
There may also be uncertainty regarding aid flows, especially over the
medium term, as well as considerations regarding long-term dependency
on external official aid. In the absence of medium-term commitments of
aid, policymakers may therefore wish to be cautious in assuming what levels
of assistance would be forthcoming in the future.Monetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesMonetary and exchange rate policies can affect the poor primarily through
three channels: inflation, output, and the real exchange rate. As mentioned
above, inflation hurts the poor because it acts as a regressive tax and
curbs growth. Fluctuations in output clearly have a direct impact upon
the incomes of the poor, and monetary and exchange rate policies affect
these fluctuations in two ways: first, changes in the money supply can
have a short-run effect on real variables such as the real interest rate,25which in turn affect output; and second, a country’s chosen exchange
rate regime can buffer, or amplify, exogenous shocks. Finally, the real
exchange rate can affect the poor in two ways.26First, it influences a country’s external competitiveness and hence
its growth rate. Second, a change in the real exchange rate (through,
for example, a devaluation of the nominal rate) can have a direct impact
on the poor.27Given that monetary and exchange rate policies affect the poor through
their impact on inflation, output, and the real exchange rate, it might
seem, at first glance, that such policies should therefore be used to
target all three of these variables. However, although monetary and exchange
rate policies may affect the poor through all of these channels, the monetary
authorities cannot necessarily control the size and nature of the resulting
impact. For example, changes in the money supply may affect output and
employment in the short run, but they do so in a way that is at best uncertain
and imperfectly understood. As a result, monetary authorities are typically
unable to exploit this impact systematically. Similarly, monetary and
exchange rate policies are unable to manipulate the real exchange rate
beyond a short period of time. Therefore, actively using these policies
to pursue a particular short-run exchange rate goal, which may be inconsistent
with underlying economic fundamentals, could introduce instability.Monetary and exchange rate policies should target those variables over
which they have the most control, namely the long-run impact of inflation
on the rate of growth. Broadly speaking, this can be achieved by setting
one objective for monetary and exchange rate policies: the attainment
and maintenance of a low and stable rate of inflation. In practice this
means (1) choosing, and firmly committing to, an inflation rate target
within the context of the overall poverty reduction strategy and the associated
macroeconomic framework; (2) adopting the required policies to achieve
the target; and (3) not using monetary and exchange rate policies to pursue,
overtly or otherwise, additional or alternative objectives. Formulated
and implemented in this way, monetary and exchange rate policies can form
the basis for a stable macroeconomic environment.Improving Inflation PerformanceIn some cases, it may be desirable to target a lower rate of inflation.
What policies can help meet this objective? Ultimately, this question
has to be answered on a case-by-case basis. However, policymakers should
consider two general policies that are essential parts of any effort to
improve inflation performance: strong and sustained fiscal adjustment;
and the use of a nominal anchor and other measures (e.g., inflation targeting)
to enhance policy credibility.Fiscal AdjustmentA loose fiscal stance can put upward pressure on prices through two channels:
aggregate demand and financing. Such a fiscal stance increases the demand
for domestic goods, which, in the absence of a corresponding increase
in supply, puts upward pressure on their prices. It can also increase
demand for imports, putting downward pressure on the value of the domestic
currency and, hence, (in a flexible exchange rate regime) upward pressure
on the prices of imported goods. Further, if the fiscal stance is financed
by printing money, this expands the money supply and tends to increase
inflation.In theory, if inflationary pressures from the fiscal stance are being
transmitted exclusively through the financing channel, then inflationary
pressures could be reduced without fiscal adjustment if alternative (sustainable)
sources of financing, such as external financing, are available. In practice,
however, some fiscal adjustment is typically also necessary because either
the amount of alternative finance is insufficient and/or the fiscal stance
is also putting upward pressure on prices through the aggregate demand
channel. Indeed, evidence shows that successful disinflation episodes
have typically been accompanied by sizable and sustained fiscal adjustment
(Phillips, 1999). Therefore, countries that wish to target a significantly
lower rate of inflation need to ensure that the corresponding fiscal adjustment
is adequate.Credibility and Nominal AnchorsSetting policy targets is important. Consistently achieving those targets
is equally important. When targets under a policy are systematically missed,
the policy loses credibility. If a policy lacks credibility, the private
sector does not believe that the authorities are truly committed to their
policy targets, and hence does not fully factor the authorities’
targets into its inflation expectations, for instance when setting wage
bargains. This can result in an inflation bias—that is, higher inflation
outcomes brought on solely by the lack of policy credibility itself.Credibility can sometimes be enhanced by imposing restrictions on policy
(i.e., limiting the degree of discretion of the monetary authorities),
or by adopting specific institutional arrangements. For example, the adoption
of a fixed exchange rate regime involves a commitment to exchange domestic
currency for foreign currencies at a predefined rate. This imposes an
automatic discipline upon domestic monetary policy. In effect, control
over monetary policy is surrendered to the central bank of the country
whose currency has been chosen as the peg—typically a low inflation
country—which, in turn, imparts credibility to the domestic policy
objective of achieving low inflation.More generally, evidence shows that inflation performance has been better
in countries using a nominal anchor (Phillips, 1999). Using a nominal
anchor involves specifying and committing to a predetermined path for
a nominal variable—such as the exchange rate (i.e., the fixed exchange
rate discussed above is a nominal anchor) or a money aggregate—that
is to a certain degree under the control of the authorities.28If the variable threatens to deviate from its targeted path the authorities
take corrective action.29In this way,
inflation, and inflationary expectations, can be anchored.In some countries, fixed exchange rate regimes have clearly been
effective in establishing and maintaining low inflation. More generally,
there is empirical evidence that inflation performance has been better
in countries running fixed exchange rate regimes (see, for example, Ghosh
and others, 1999). However, the choice of a fixed exchange rate has to
be based on broader considerations than simply its merits as a nominal
anchor. In particular, the underlying structural features of an economy
need to be supportive of a fixed regime broadly speaking (for example,
the degree of price rigidity, the nature of its predominant exogenous
shocks, the degree of political support, etc.—these issues are discussed
below). Adopting a fixed exchange regime to serve only temporarily as
a nominal anchor can be risky. Exiting a fixed regime once inflation performance
is satisfactory can be difficult. Moreover, if a country’s economic
conditions are not supportive, or political support for the policy insufficient,
the peg could come under considerable pressure, which may, in the end,
force a costly abandonment of the regime and undermine the original objective
of stabilizing inflation.Both types of nominal anchors restrict the use of monetary instruments.30A standard critique has been that, although the use of a nominal anchor
may improve inflation performance, it comes at the cost of reducing the
discretion of the authorities to respond to short-run shocks. In practice
this trade-off may not be significant, however. Even if the monetary authorities
have full discretion,31as discussed above, their
ability to influence short-run output movements systematically is limited.
Moreover, their ability to exercise discretion is likely to be limited
by the need to preserve, or enhance, policy credibility.Inflation targeting has been adopted as the monetary regime in an
increasing number of industrialized and developing countries in recent
years. It is typically and preferably associated with a flexible exchange
rate system. Inflation targeting sets an inflation target for the central
bank and gives the responsibility for achieving the target to the central
bank. To enhance accountability, credibility, and efficiency, the central
bank in an inflation targeting regime is generally required to be extremely
transparent about its operations, explaining its decisions to the public,
publishing, in most cases, a regular inflation report.In the long run, however, only policies to which the authorities
are fully committed can be credible. Imposing restrictions on policy when
the necessary policy commitment is absent (or even when the private sector
erroneously suspects a lack of commitment) can have disastrous results.
For example, the private sector’s belief that a country’s authorities
are not committed to defending its fixed exchange rate may lead to a speculative
attack on the peg. Although devices may be used to accelerate the attainment
of a policy’s credibility, there is no substitute for commitment
to the policy, as demonstrated through sustained adherence to a prudent
macroeconomic stance.External Shocks and the Choice of Exchange Rate RegimeThe choice of exchange rate regime—fixed or flexible—depends
crucially on the nature of the economic shocks that affect the economy,
as well as the structural features of the economy, which may either mitigate
or amplify these shocks. Choosing a fixed exchange rate regime when these
underlying features of the economy are not supportive leaves a country
more exposed to the possibility of an external crisis, which can result
in the ultimate abandonment of the peg. In addition, shocks to output
can have a strong impact on the poor. Since different exchange rate regimes
have different insulating properties vis-à-vis certain types of
shocks, choosing the regime that best insulates the economy will serve
to moderate fluctuations in output, and thereby best serve the poor.For example, if the predominant source of disturbance to an economy is
shocks to the terms of trade, a flexible exchange rate regime may be best
because the nominal exchange rate is free to adjust in response to the
shock and bring the real exchange rate to its new equilibrium (see, for
example, Devarajan and Rodrik, 1992). Alternatively, if domestic monetary
shocks predominate, such as shocks to the demand for money, output may
be best insulated by a fixed exchange rate that allows these shocks to
be absorbed by fluctuations in international reserves. Of course, one
of the challenges facing the policymaker is to identify which shocks are
in fact predominant in a particular economy.The structural features of the economy may also affect the impact a particular
shock has on the economy, as well as the insulating properties of exchange
rate regimes. For example, if an economy is characterized by a significant
degree of nominal wage rigidity, wages will not fully adjust (at least
in the short run) in response to small real shocks, and hence the effect
of those shocks on output will be amplified. In these circumstances, even
if domestic monetary shocks are important, a flexible exchange rate regime
may well be preferable (in contrast to the conclusions above). Another
important structural feature is the degree of an economy’s openness.
Typically the more open an economy is, the greater is its exposure to
external shocks. This would argue generally in favor of a flexible exchange
rate regime. However, if an open economy is sufficiently diversified (i.e.,
it trades a wide range of goods and services) and if its prices are sufficiently
flexible, then a fixed exchange rate may be preferable because the volatility
of flexible exchange rates may impede international trade, and thus lower
external demand (although the evidence on this is mixed). In conclusion,
these various pros and cons of fixed versus flexible exchange rate regimes
need to be carefully assessed and weighed on a case-by-case basis—again,
there is no universal “right answer.”Policies to Insulate the Poor Against ShocksGiven that the poor are adversely affected by macroeconomic shocks, what
should governments do about it? The question can be divided into two parts:
How should economic policy be designed to cushion the impact of shocks
on the poor, in particular during times of crisis and/or adjustment? What
specific policies can governments undertake to insulate the poor from
the consequences of shocks by removing existing distortive policies?Social Safety NetsSound macroeconomic policies will help a country to reduce its exposure
to macroeconomic shocks, but there is no cost-effective policy that will
insure againstallpossible shocks. It is therefore crucial to
havesocial safety netsin place to ensure that poor households
are able to maintain minimum consumption levels and access to basic social
services during periods of crisis. Social safety net measures are also
necessary to protect the poor from shocks imposed on them during periods
of economic reform and adjustment.32Safety
nets include public work programs, limited food subsidies, transfers to
compensate for income loss, social funds, fee waivers, and scholarships
for essential services such as education and health. The specific mix
of measures will depend on the particular characteristics of the poor
and their vulnerability to shocks and should be well-targeted and designed
in most cases to provide temporary support.Equally important, the resources allocated to social safety nets should
be protected during economic crises and/or adjustment, when fiscal tightening
may be necessary. Governments should have budgetary guidelines approved
by their legislatures that prioritize and protect poverty-related programs
during periods of crisis and provide a clear course of action that ensures
access of the poor to basic social services during periods of austerity
(see Lustig, forthcoming). As will be discussed below, countercyclical
fiscal policies can also ensure the availability of funds for financing
safety nets during crises.Another important factor to consider is that safety nets should already
be operating before economies get hit by shocks so that they can be effective
in times of distress (for a more detailed account, see World Bank, 2000).
However, if a shock occurs before appropriate safety nets have been developed,
then “second-best” social protection policies may be necessary.
For instance, food subsidies have been found to be inefficient and often
benefiting the non-poor, and most reform programs call for their reduction
or even elimination. However, after a severe shock such as the 1997–98
East Asian financial crisis, when countries like Indonesia lacked comprehensive
safety nets, existing food subsidies were probably the only means of preventing
widespread malnutrition and starvation. In the context of a country’s
reform process, however, these subsidies should be replaced with better
targeted and less distorting transfers to the poor.Removing Market Distortions and Distortive PoliciesIn addition to pursuing favorable economic policies and putting in place
appropriate social safety nets, there are specific structural reforms
that governments can undertake to insulate the poor from the adverse consequences
of shocks. Most of these have to do with addressing the mechanisms through
which macroeconomic shocks are transmitted to the poor. (see
Box 5).To the extent that asset market distortions prevent the poor from saving
and insulating themselves against shocks, policies to remove these distortions
can be valuable.33For instance, foreign
exchange controls can force the poor to hold their assets in domestic
currency, whose value typically declines with adverse shocks. Relaxing
these controls in a well-managed fashion could give the poor access to
safer assets, such as foreign currency, that could protect them from devaluations,
a typical outcome following negative shocks.34Similarly, severe financial repression, such as controlled interest rates,
can impede the poor’s ability to save.35If properly managed, financial liberalization policies can therefore have
the additional benefit of increasing self-insurance for the poor.Box 5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission ChannelsCredit markets, as well as safe asset markets for appropriate
saving, are major instruments for coping with income volatility.
Distortions in these markets curtail the ability of the poor
to follow consumption smoothing patterns. Government behavior
in response to shocks is also a major determinant of the effects
of these shocks on the poor. Financial sector behavior can
also amplify the effects of shocks.Distortions in asset markets. To self-insure against
shocks, agents need to be able to save in assets whose value
does not fall when they are needed to compensate for a fall
in income. Such saving instruments are typically composed
of foreign assets, domestic financial assets, and domestic
real assets. To the extent that governments impose controls
on these asset markets, it impedes the ability of the poor
to use these savings instruments, and channels their savings
into less effective instruments.1Access to and structure of credit markets. Access
to credit markets is extremely limited for the poor to buffer
the effects of shocks, in part as a consequence of inadequate
borrower information available to credit institutions. The
structure of credit markets can also affect the poor indirectly:
Firms may find that access to credit is typically collateralized.
Therefore, shocks that drastically reduce the value of collateral
will also reduce firms’ access to credit, amplifying
the effect of shocks when firms become credit constrained.
Severe downturns may dramatically cut employment of the
poor and, hence, their welfare, especially since the poor
are usually employed by small firms that depend on collateralized
credit.Procyclical fiscal policy. During booms, some governments
have decreased export commodity taxes, reduced revenue collection
effort, or heavily increased expenditures, amplifying the
effects of positive shocks. These policies can make adjustment
more severe during busts, since the resulting expenditure
cuts following a negative shock have sometimes fallen on
social programs and transfers to the poor—just when
they are needed the most. Examples of these policies can
be traced back to the experience of Côte d’Ivoire
in 1976–79, and Colombia in 1975–1980. It has
also been argued that synchronizing tax policies with shocks
tends to obscure the information content of prices on which
agents make their saving decisions, leading in many cases
to lower saving rates than needed to buffer future adverse
shocks (Collier, Gunning, and associates 1999).Financial sector vulnerability and transmission to
other sectors. Shocks can also be amplified through
the banking system. For example, a negative terms of trade
shock can adversely affect bank liquidity by reducing demand
for domestic deposits, forcing banks to curtail credit roll-over,
spreading the shock throughout the economy (IADB, 1995,
and Hausmann, 1999). Similarly, if a sudden stop in capital
flows renders many nontradable goods producers bankrupt
because of big swings in relative prices, this may in turn
create financial turmoil as loans become nonperforming,
spreading the effect of the shock across the financial system
(Calvo, 1998). Bankruptcies in the nontradable sector may
translate into unemployment of the urban poor.1For example,
in Ethiopia, livestock prices (often the poor’s only
asset) fall during a drought because all farmers are selling
their cattle to compensate for the bad harvest.Policies that increase borrower information and relax barriers to access
to credit markets can help the poor reduce consumption volatility, since
credit availability makes them less dependent on current income. Also,
to the extent that collateralized credit allocation amplifies the effects
of negative shocks by reducing small- and medium-sized firms’ access
to credit when asset prices fall (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1977, and Izquierdo,
1999), policies promoting better financial-sector credit allocation mechanisms
based on project profitability and borrower information could reduce the
incidence of this particular transmission channel and its indirect effects
on the poor (i.e., lower employment opportunities).36Finally, and most important, governments can do a lot to reduce the pro-cyclical
nature of their fiscal policies by saving rather than spending windfalls
following positive shocks and ideally using those savings as a buffer
for expenditures against negative shocks. A cautious approach would be
for the government to “treat every favorable shock as temporary and
every adverse one as permanent,” although judgment would also depend
on, among other things, the availability of financing (Little, and others,
1993). However, even this rule of thumb may not be enough. Governments
need to find ways of “tying their hands” to resist the pressure
to spend windfall revenues (Devarajan, 1999). For example, when the source
of revenue is publicly owned, such as oil or other natural resource, it
may be appropriate to save the windfall revenues abroad, with strict rules
on how much of it can be repatriated. Countries such as Colombia, Chile,
and Botswana have tried variants of this strategy, with benefits not just
for overall macroeconomic management, but also for protecting the poor
during adverse shocks, since saved funds during good times can be applied
to financing of safety nets during crisis.1There has been an emerging
consensus on how to make actions at the country level, and the support
of development partners, more effective in bringing about sustainable
poverty reduction. This consensus indicates a need for poverty reduction
strategies that are country-driven, with broad participation of civil
society, elected officials, key donors, and relevant international finance
institutions; outcome-oriented; and developed from an understanding of
the nature and determinants of poverty. Under the new framework, the country-led
strategy would be presented in a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP),
which is expected to become a key instrument for a country’s relations
with the donor community.2Macroeconomic stability is
a situation where key economic relationships are broadly in balance and
sustainable.3The sourcebook is available
at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.4These points are reflected
in the design of programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF), which are derived from a country’s own poverty
reduction strategy. The strategy itself should be based upon fully integrated
macroeconomic, structural, and social policies. SeeKey Features of
IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs,
August 16, 2000, available at http://www.imf.org/external/ np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.5Examples include the relationship
between infant mortality rates and per capita income, the ratio of female
to male literacy and per capita income, and average consumption and the
incidence of income poverty. In all three cases, national poverty indicators
improved as per capita income rose. See the discussion in the World Bank’sWorld Development Report, 2000.6Devarajan, Swaroop, and Zou
(1997) and Devarajan, Easterly, and Pack (forthcoming).7There is little empirical
evidence, however, that public sector capital expenditure has a positive
impact on growth, reflecting the tendency for such investment in the past
to be wasteful or inefficient. This does not mean public investment is
unimportant—only that efficiency considerations must be central in any
public investment program. See Easterly and Rebelo (1993), Devarajan,
Swaroop, and Zou (1997).8Empirical evidence confirms
a strong negative relationship between inflation and economic growth at
all but the lowest levels of inflation. See Fischer (1993), Bruno and
Easterly (1998), Ghosh and Phillips (1998), and Sarel (1996).9For any given increment in
per capita income, the impact on poverty will depend on how that increment
is distributed across the population. While growth is almost always accompanied
by a reduction in income poverty, and negative growth is accompanied by
an increase in poverty, for any given growth rate the impact on poverty
can vary substantially.10Ravallion (1997), Datt and
Ravallion (1992), and Kakwani (1993).11To the extent that people
with high income save a larger proportion of their income than do those
with low income, policies that redistribute income in favor of the lower-income
population may impede savings and, to the extent that such savings are
channeled into productive investment, long-term growth.12This refers to developing
economies, where often income (and wealth) inequality is particularly
acute. In general, there is likely to be a point beyond which greater
equity is incompatible with adequate labor and enterprise incentives,
which, in turn, would be detrimental to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik
(1994); Bénabou (1996); Birdsall and Londoño (1997); Deninger and Squire
(1998); Perotti (1992, 1993, and 1996); and Persson and Tabellini (1994).13By increasing the human
capital of the poor, redistributive policies can increase the productivity
of the workforce, thereby enhancing growth. Others have argued that there
is also a political economy channel as well—in countries with greater
income equality there is greater political support for public policies
that are more conducive to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik (1994), and
Persson and Tabellini (1994). For empirical support for this effect, see
Deininger (1999); Thomas and Wang (1998); Klasen (1999); and Dollar and
Gatti (1999). For dissenting views, see Forbes (2000) and Li, Xie, and
Zou (1999).14It is also often argued
that if growth results in the expansion of low-skilled employment, then
the poor are more likely to be the beneficiaries of the growth. One recent
cross-country study (Fallon and Hon, 1999) found that the more labor-intensive
the growth pattern, the faster the decline in the incidence of poverty.15Datt and Ravallion (1998),
Thorbecke and Jung (1996), Timmer (1997), and Bourguignon and Morrisson
(1998).16In certain cases, the return
to a steady growth state may also require structural reform and measures
to improve the functioning of markets.17Broadly speaking, this means
leaving the underlying stance of macroeconomic policy unchanged (or, in
some cases, the stance may be adjusted temporarily to mitigate the impact
of the shock) and adjusting policy targets in a way that takes into account
the impact of the shock. However, if such a policy stance cannot be financed
in a noninflationary way, then some adjustment will also be necessary.18Indeed, a key feature of
programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) is to assess the distributional impact of key macroeconomic policies
and to put in place countervailing measures needed to protect the poor.
SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
Supported Programs, August 16, 2000 at http://www.imf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.19Social safety nets are designed
to mitigate possible adverse effects of reform measures on the poor. These
instruments include temporary arrangements, as well as existing social
protection measures reformed and adapted for this purpose, such as limited
food subsidies, social security arrangements for dealing with various
life cycle and other contingencies, and targeted public works. See Chu
and Gupta (1998).20Even if the strategy can
be fully financed with concessional resources, policymakers will need
to assess the degree to which poverty-reducing spending may place pressure
on the price of nontraded goods and thereby threaten stability.21TheSourcebookcan
be found at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.22Ensuring there is appropriate
flexibility in fiscal targets and supporting authorities’ efforts to secure
commitments of higher donor flows when warranted are key features of the
IMF’s PRGF-supported programs. SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs, August 16, 2000, at
http://www.inf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/ eng/key.htm.23"Priority areas" are defined
as those activities identified as crucial for poverty reduction.24For a discussion of tax
policy and developing countries, see Tanzi and Zee (2000).25The real interest rate represents
the real cost of borrowing—that is, the cost in terms of goods—and is
approximately equal to the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate
of inflation.26The real exchange rate represents
the relative price of a basket of goods in two countries. It is commonly
measured by multiplying the nominal exchange rate by the ratio of consumer
price indices in the two countries. If the real exchange rate appreciates,
the basket of goods becomes more expensive in the home country. This can
happen if either the home currency appreciates, or if the home country’s
prices rise relative to those of the foreign country.27For example, as indicated
earlier, recent studies have shown that in some countries, the income
of the poor is more associated with tradable goods and consumption with
nontradable goods than the income and consumption patterns of other income
groups. In these countries, this implies that a depreciation or devaluation
of the domestic currency would make the country’s exports more attractive
and stimulate demand for tradable goods. Since the poor’s incomes are
tied to the production and export of tradables, this would, in turn, increase
their income while the cost of their consumption of nontradables would
remain unchanged.28Other nominal variables
can also serve as anchors. What is essential is that the variable targeted
be nominal, and not real, since real variables cannot provide an anchor
for nominal prices. For example, countries that have targeted the real
exchange rate have generally had worse inflation performance than other
countries. See Phillips (1999).29The two most commonly used
nominal anchors are a fixed exchange rate and a money aggregate (such
as reserve money or broad money). Under a fixed exchange rate regime,
whenever the market rate threatens to depart from the predetermined rate,
the monetary authorities buy or sell foreign exchange for the domestic
currency to ensure that the exchange rate remains fixed. Similarly, under
a monetary anchor the monetary authorities specify a predetermined path
for a monetary aggregate, and tighten or loosen the monetary stance when
the aggregate threatens to depart from that path.30Under a fixed exchange rate,
the monetary authorities give up control of the money supply. Under a
monetary anchor, the authorities cannot pursue an exchange rate target.31If there are no explicit
policy targets, the monetary authorities have full discretion. This differs
from the concept of independence of the monetary authorities.32Reform programs should be
designed with the poor and vulnerable in mind. The mix and sequencing
of reform measures should be designed to minimize the hardships brought
about by the program. The appropriate mix and sequencing cannot, however,
ensure that the adverse effects will be removed entirely and, hence, social
safety nets are needed to mitigate possible short-run adverse effects
on the poor. In some cases, it may be appropriate to delay reforms until
adequate safety net measures can be put in place. See Chu and Gupta (1998).33Contrary to what some may
believe, the poor do save, to smooth consumption over time, as well as
to guard against adverse shocks. For a recent analysis, see Deaton and
Paxson (2000).34Also, capital controls that
drive a wedge between domestic and world real interest rates make it possible
to extract an inflation tax, which especially hurts the poor.35For many countries, domestic
asset holdings of the poor are mainly composed of currency, so it would
seem that this channel is not relevant. But this may just reflect that
low controlled interest rates provide a disincentive to save in bank deposits.
Removing financial distortions could shift the allocation of domestic
assets in favor of deposits and, to the extent that market interest rates
account for expected inflation, insulate the poor’s savings from inflation.36Collateralization may be
initially the only way for small firms to gain access to credit markets,
but its amplification effects should not be understated. Instead, policies
that reduce informational problems (i.e., the reason for collateralization)
should be implemented.The following three tables show macroeconomic data, such as GDP growth,
for a range of developing countries. The tables reveal that many developing
countries are in a state of macroeconomic stability.Table 1. Real GDP Growth(Annual percentage change)1994199519961997199819991994-99AverageHigh-growth countriesMozambique7.54.37.111.312.09.08.5Sudan4.025.24.06.75.04.08.2Vietnam8.89.59.38.15.84.27.6Uganda6.411.59.14.75.67.87.5Bhutan8.16.85.57.87.17.07.1India7.98.07.35.06.16.26.8Togo16.86.89.74.3–1.03.06.6Myanmar7.56.96.45.75.0...6.3Lao PDR8.27.06.87.04.04.06.2Angola1.411.311.76.65.0–0.16.0Eritrea9.82.96.87.93.93.05.7Armenia5.46.95.93.37.25.55.7Ethiopia3.56.110.95.9–1.07.05.4Côte d’Ivoire2.07.06.95.94.54.35.1Benin4.44.65.55.74.55.05.0Bangladesh3.85.55.05.35.14.34.8Senegal2.94.75.25.05.75.14.8Rwanda–50.234.415.812.89.55.94.7Nicaragua3.34.34.75.14.06.34.6Nepal8.23.55.35.02.33.44.6Burkina Faso1.24.06.04.76.25.24.6Malawi–10.215.49.04.93.14.54.5Chad10.21.03.74.18.1–1.04.4Guinea4.04.44.64.84.43.74.3Mali0.96.23.26.83.35.34.3Mauritania4.64.65.53.23.24.34.2Ghana3.34.04.64.24.74.44.2Cambodia4.07.67.01.01.04.54.2Niger4.02.63.43.38.32.34.0Lesotho3.44.510.08.0–5.02.53.9Zimbabwe6.8–0.58.73.72.51.23.7Pakistan3.95.15.01.23.33.93.7Yemen, Rep. of–3.67.92.98.14.82.23.7Central African Republic4.97.2–4.05.24.73.43.6Mongolia2.36.32.44.03.52.73.5Cameroon–2.53.35.05.15.04.43.4Tanzania1.42.64.34.03.54.33.4Georgia–11.42.410.511.02.92.02.9Gambia, The0.20.92.24.94.74.22.9Kenya2.64.44.12.11.81.62.8Madagascar0.01.72.13.73.94.72.7Indonesia7.58.27.84.7–13.20.22.5Nigeria0.12.54.32.71.81.02.1Solomon Islands5.27.03.5–0.5–7.04.02.0São Tomé and Príncipe2.22.01.51.02.52.52.0Low-growth countriesCongo, Rep. of–5.54.06.3–2.43.6–0.70.9Haiti–8.34.42.71.43.1...0.7Zambia–3.4–2.36.53.4–2.01.30.6Uzbekistan–5.2–0.91.72.54.4...0.5Guinea-Bissau3.24.44.65.4–28.18.7–0.3Kyrgyz Republic–20.1–5.47.19.91.8...–1.3Congo, Dem. Rep. of–3.90.7–0.9–5.73.0...–1.4Comoros–5.3–3.9–0.40.00.01.0–1.4Azerbaijan–24.3–11.81.35.810.010.0–1.5Burundi–3.9–7.3–8.40.44.8–1.0–2.6Sierra Leone3.5–26.628.7–17.6–0.8–8.1–3.5Tajikistan–19.0–11.8–4.42.38.2...–4.9Turkmenistan–17.3–7.2–6.7–11.35.0...–7.5Ukraine–22.9–12.2–10.0–3.0–1.7–2.0–8.6Moldova–31.2–1.4–7.81.3–8.6–5.0–8.8Afghanistan........................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of........................Liberia........................Somalia........................Source: Country authoritiesTable 2. GDP Deflator(Annual percentage change)1994199519961997199819991994-99AverageLow-inflation countriesGambia, The3.84.02.95.01.35.23.7Guinea2.95.52.82.45.04.03.8Bangladesh3.46.73.81.05.38.94.9Comoros9.48.02.33.53.03.04.9Ethiopia2.612.71.03.29.71.95.2Mauritania6.44.44.65.59.91.95.5Cameroon11.017.05.42.71.1–1.26.0Uganda6.89.44.63.910.73.06.4Central African Republic22.810.31.80.81.71.36.5Senegal27.85.90.92.32.21.66.8Nepal7.46.37.87.33.39.26.9India9.78.67.95.68.95.57.7Lesotho7.58.98.68.08.47.28.1Burkina Faso27.89.84.22.23.11.68.1Niger32.75.44.73.13.03.08.7Eritrea22.211.32.92.72.712.69.1Cambodia8.99.17.19.217.05.79.5Bhutan9.39.811.414.75.97.89.8Mali27.918.45.41.04.02.29.8Solomon Islands11.57.112.18.112.0…10.2Pakistan12.913.88.413.37.85.510.3Côte d’Ivoire41.79.62.73.23.12.710.5Nicaragua7.810.911.69.212.913.911.1Togo33.812.25.111.42.71.111.1Vietnam14.519.56.112.18.95.811.2Benin33.515.46.74.74.23.511.3Chad43.48.611.62.74.1–2.111.4Congo, Rep. of36.822.6–3.07.5–19.124.111.5Burundi6.715.319.023.312.10.612.8Kenya35.211.28.715.510.65.014.4Rwanda18.051.310.515.62.6–2.415.9High-inflation countriesTanzania28.228.922.318.519.311.621.50Indonesia7.89.98.712.673.117.221.6Madagascar41.645.217.87.38.49.821.7Haiti35.631.021.216.312.7…23.4Nigeria27.856.036.91.421.611.925.9Sierra Leone20.163.73.016.827.025.025.9Myanmar22.119.423.032.934.0…26.3Yemen, Rep. of33.254.839.612.9–9.326.826.3Ghana30.143.239.819.517.011.526.9Guinea-Bissau23.244.748.635.57.63.127.1Mozambique59.452.040.911.13.85.228.7Mongolia66.642.533.524.411.52.830.2Zambia56.636.924.325.923.225.632.1Malawi26.290.340.413.523.246.440.0Lao PDR7.719.713.917.784.0125.444.7Kyrgyz Republic180.942.035.319.38.5…57.2São Tomé and Príncipe73.574.550.8100.237.116.058.7Sudan80.841.1107.464.928.9…64.6Moldova278.138.730.512.98.037.367.6Tajikistan236.2285.0397.9100.249.9…213.8Ukraine953.5415.566.218.113.2…293.3Azerbaijan1,428.6545.726.49.2–8.34.8334.4Uzbekistan1,238.6370.981.670.533.2…359.0Turkmenistan1,022.1705.71,174.361.613.5…595.4Armenia4,107.3161.219.617.711.21.1719.7Georgia9,349.2162.740.27.03.415.01,596.3Angola2,170.71,886.15,421.893.660.9412.61,674.3Congo, Dem. Rep. of26,762.4466.4613.1187.315.0…5,608.8Afghanistan........................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of........................Liberia........................Somalia........................Source: Country authoritiesTable 3. Primary Surplus1(As a percentage of GDP)199419951996199719981994-98AverageSurplus/low deficit countriesMauritania2.46.511.48.28.47.4Kenya8.37.36.26.25.86.8Lesotho8.16.36.52.1–4.53.7Congo, Rep.–1.15.97.04.42.23.7Cameroon–2.23.25.05.44.13.1Zambia5.23.82.13.50.13.0Côte d’Ivoire1.43.23.83.02.62.8São Tomé and Príncipe……–0.311.3–2.82.7Nigeria0.58.17.53.3–6.92.5Senegal1.62.72.12.21.72.1Tanzania0.6–0.51.24.72.21.6Zimbabwe0.0–0.70.7–0.48.01.5Benin0.8–0.52.12.03.31.5Bhutan–0.50.12.0;–2.13.00.5Myanmar0.00.00.00.00.00.0Indonesia1.11.41.1–0.5–3.30.0Vietnam…–0.6–0.2–0.8–1.6–0.8Gambia, The2.6–2.9–5.3–1.42.9–0.8Madagascar–3.0–1.1–0.20.7–1.8–1.1Uganda–2.3–1.9–0.9–0.90.4–1.1Niger–4.5–1.51.4–1.1–0.4–1.2Mali–2.0–1.70.2–1.1–1.6–1.2Guinea–2.0–1.3–1.7–1.3–1.8–1.6Burkina Faso–1.8–2.20.3–2.3–2.1–1.6Mozambique–4.2–1.6–1.5–1.3–1.4–2.0Ethiopia–4.3–1.4–3.20.7–2.1–2.1Malawi–16.21.02.3–5.27.0–2.2Central African Republic–7.6–2.8–1.5–0.90.6–2.5Ghana–4.4–2.1–4.4–2.70.1–2.7Rwanda–7.00.0–4.1–1.3–1.9–2.9Togo–6.2–3.0–3.00.2–3.0–3.0High deficit countriesChad–3.5–3.4–4.0–2.9–4.1–3.6Solomon Islands–5.5–5.3–4.4–4.90.1–4.0Burundi–2.8–3.1–8.3–3.4–2.7–4.1Bangladesh–4.6–5.3–4.4–4.3–4.2–4.5Haiti–1.8–8.3–7.6–3.1–4.0–5.0Sierra Leone–4.5–7.8–4.4–5.0–5.1–5.4Pakistan–6.0–5.9–7.0–6.4–5.5–6.2Lao PDR…–4.5–5.9–8.1–7.2–6.4Nepal–7.0–6.6–7.5–7.3–7.8–7.2Angola–8.1–16.51.1……–7.8India–8.8–7.9–7.8–8.5–9.4–8.5Nicaragua–11.4–11.0–10.2–7.6–5.0–9.0Mongolia–22.8–4.1–8.2–8.6–11.3–11.0Eritrea...............–27.3–27.3Afghanistan.....................Cambodia.....................Comoros.....................Congo, Dem. Rep. of.....................Guinea-Bissau.....................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of.....................Liberia.....................Somalia.....................Sudan.....................Source: Data provided by the authorities.1Negative sign indicates a primary deficit.ReferencesAgenor, Pierre-Richard, Shantayanan Devarajan, William Easterly, Hippolyte
Fofack, Delfin Go, Alejandro Izquierdo, Lodovico Pizzati, 2000, “A
Macroeconomic Framework for Poverty Reduction Strategies,” Development
Research Group and World Bank Institute (unpublished; Washington: World
Bank).Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1994, “Distributive Politics
and Economic Growth,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
109 (May), pp. 465–90.Balassa, Bela, 1981, “The Newly Industrializing Developing Countries
after the Oil Crisis,”WeltwirtschaftlichesArchiv, Vol. 117,
No.1, pp. 142–94.Behrman, Jere, Suzanne Duryea, and Miguel Szeleky, 1999, “Schooling
Investments and Macroeconomic Conditions: A Micro-Macro Investigation
for Latin America and the Caribbean” (unpublished; Washington: Inter-American
Development Bank).Bénabou, Roland, 1996, “Inequality and Growth,” inNBER
Macroeconomics Annual: Volume II, ed. by Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).Birdsall, Nancy, and Juan Luis Londoño, 1997, “Asset Inequality
Matters: An Assessment of the World Bank’s Approach to Poverty Reduction,”American Economic Review, Vol. 87(May), pp. 32–37.Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson, 1998, “Inequality
and Development: The Role of Dualism,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 57 (December), pp. 233–57.Bourguignon, François, William H. Branson, and Jaime de Melo,
1989,Macroeconomic Adjustment and Income Distribution: A Macro- Micro
Simulation Model(Paris: OECD Development Centre).Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1998, “Inflation Crises and
Long-Run Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 41(February),
pp. 3–26.Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises:
The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”Journal of Applied Economics,
Vol. 1 (November), pp. 35–54.Chu, Ke-young, and Sanjeev Gupta, eds., 1998,Social Safety Nets:
Issues and Recent Experiences(Washington: International Monetary
Fund).Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning, 1999, “Explaining African
Economic Performance,”Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
37 (March), pp. 64–111.———, and associates, 1999,Trade Shocks in Developing
Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press).Datt, Gaurav, and Martin Ravallion, 1992, “Growth and Redistribution
Components of Changes in Poverty Measures: A Decomposition with Applications
to Brazil and India in the 1980s,”Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 38 (April), pp. 275–95.———, 1998, “Farm Productivity and Rural Poverty in
India,”Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 34 (April), pp.
62–85.Deaton, A., and C. Paxson, 2000, “Growth and Saving Among Individuals
and Households,”Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
82 (May), pp. 212–25.Deininger, Klaus, 1999, “Asset Distribution, Inequality, and Growth,”
Development Research Group (Washington: World Bank).________, and Lyn Squire, 1998, “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues:
Inequality and Growth,”Journal of Development EconomicsVol.
57 (December), pp. 259–87.Devarajan, Shantayanan, 1999, “Cameroon,” inTrade Shocks
in Developing Countries, ed. by Paul Collier and Jan Gunning (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).________, William R. Easterly, and Howard Pack, forthcoming “Is
Investment in Africa Too Low or Too High?”,Journal of African
Economies.Devarajan, Shantayanan, and Dani Rodrik, 1992, “Do the Benefits
of Fixed Exchange Rates Outweigh Their Costs? The CFA Zone in Africa,”
inOpen Economies: Structural Adjustment and Agriculture, ed. by
Ian Goldin and L. Alan Winters (Cambridge, New York, and Melbourne: Cambridge
University Press).Dollar, David, and Roberta Gatti, 1999, “Gender Inequality, Income
and Growth: Are Good Times Good for Women?” Policy Research Report
on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 1. (Washington: World
Bank).Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, 2000, “Growth Is Good for the Poor,”
World Bank Development Research Group (unpublished; Washington, D.C.,
World Bank).Easterly, William, and Aart Kraay, 1999, “Small States, Small Problems?”
Policy Research Working Paper No. 2139, Development Research Group (Washington:
World Bank).Easterly, William, and Sergio Rebelo, 1993, “Fiscal Policy and Economic
Growth: An Empirical Investigation,”Journal of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 32 (December), pp. 417–58.Fallon, Peter, and Vivian Hon, 1999, “Poverty and Labor-Intensive
Growth.” Note prepared forWorld Development Report 2000/2001(unpublished; Washington: World Bank).Fischer, Stanley, 1993, “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32 (December), pp. 485–512.Forbes, Kristin, 2000, “A Reassessment of the Relationship Between
Inequality and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 90
(September), pp. 869–887.Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan Ostry, and Holger Wolf, 1999,
“Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?” (unpublished;
Washington: International Monetary Fund).Ghosh, Atish, and Steven Phillips, 1998, “Warning: Inflation May
Be Harmful to Your Growth,”IMF Staff Papers, International
Monetary Fund, Vol. 45 (December), pp. 672–710.Hausmann, Ricardo, 1999, “Managing Terms of Trade Volatility,”
World Bank PREM Note No. 18, February (Washington: World Bank).Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 1995 “Overcoming Volatility,”
Economic and Social Progress in Latin America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press).Izquierdo, Alejandro, 1999, “Credit Constraints and the Asymmetric
Behavior of Asset Prices and Output under External Shocks,” (Doctoral
Dissertation, University of Maryland).Kakwani, Nanak, 1993, “Poverty and Economic Growth with Application
to Côte d’Ivoire,”Review of Income and Wealth,
Vol. 39 (June) pp. 121–139.Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105 (April), pp. 211–48.Klasen, Stephan, 1999, “Does Gender Inequality Reduce Growth and
Development? Evidence from Cross-Country Regressions,” Policy Research
Report on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 7. (Washington:
World Bank).Li, Hongyi, Danyang Xie, Heng-fu Zou, 1999. “Dynamics of Income
Distribution,” Development Research Group, (unpublished; Washington:
World Bank).Little, I., R. Cooper, W. M. Corden, and S. Rajapatirana, 1993, Boom,
Crisis and Adjustment:The Macroeconomic Experience of Developing Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press).Lustig, Nora, forthcoming. “Crises and the Poor: Socially Responsible
Macroeconomics.” Economia, Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic Association.Malmberg Calvo, Christina, 1998, Options for Managing and Financing Rural
Transport Infrastructure, World Bank Technical Paper No. 411 (Washington:
World Bank).Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastano, and Sunil Sharma, 1997, “The Scope
for Inflation Targeting in Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper
No. 97/130 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).Mitra, Pradeep, 1994,Adjustment in Oil-Importing Developing Countries(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).Perotti, Roberto, 1992, “Income Distribution: Politics and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 82 (May), pp. 311–16.———, 1993, “Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution,
and Growth.”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60 (October),
pp 755–76.———, 1996, “Redistribution and Non-consumption Smoothing
in an Open Economy,”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 63 (July),
pp 411–33.Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1994, “Is Inequality Harmful
for Growth?”American Economic Review, Vol. 84 (June), pp.
600–21.Phillips, Steven, 1999, “Inflation: The Case for a More Resolute
Approach” inEconomic Adjustment and Reform in Low-Income Countries:
Studies by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund,”ed.
by Hugh Bredenkamp and Susan Schadler (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey, 1995, “Cross-Country Evidence
on the Link between Volatility and Growth,”American Economic
Review, Vol. 85 (December), pp. 1138–51.Ravallion, Martin, 1997, “Can High-Inequality Developing Countries
Escape Absolute Poverty?” Policy Research Working Paper No. 1775
(Washington: World Bank).Sahn, David, Paul Dorosh, and Stephen Younger, 1997,Structural Adjustment
Reconsidered: Economic Policy and Poverty in Africa, (New York: Cambridge
University Press).Sarel, Michael, 1996, “Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Economic
Growth,”Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 43
(March), pp. 199–215.Tanzi, Vito, and Howell Zee, 2000, “Tax Policy for Emerging Markets:
Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper No. 00/35 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).Thomas, Vinod, and Yan Wang, 1998, “Missing Lessons of East Asia:
Openness, Education, and the Environment,” Latin America and Caribbean
Studies: Proceedings series (Washington: World Bank).Thorbecke, Erik, and Hong-Sang Jung, 1996, “A Multiplier Decomposition
Method to Analyze Poverty Alleviation,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 48 (March), pp. 279–300.Timmer, C. Peter, 1997, “How Well Do the Poor Connect to the Growth
Process?” Consulting Assistance on Economic Reform Discussion Paper
No. 178. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Institute for International Development).White, Howard, and Edward Anderson, forthcoming, “Growth Versus
Distribution: Does the Pattern of Growth Matter?”, Institute of Development
Studies, University of Sussex.World Bank, 1982,Accelerated Development in Sub-Saharan Africa(Washington: World Bank).World Bank, 2000,World Development Report(New York and Washington:
Oxford University Press and World Bank).HomeWhat's NewSite MapSite IndexAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublicationsCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyHow to Contact Usعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Poverty is a multidimensional problem that goes beyond economics to include,
among other things, social, political, and cultural issues (see
Box 1). Therefore, solutions to poverty cannot be based exclusively
on economic policies, but require a comprehensive set of well-coordinated
measures. Indeed, this is the foundation for the rationale underlying
comprehensive poverty reduction strategies.1So why focus on macroeconomic issues? Because economic growth is the single
most important factor influencing poverty, and macroeconomic stability
is essential for high and sustainable rates of growth.2Hence, macroeconomic stability should be a key component of any poverty
reduction strategy. 
 
Macroeconomic stability by itself, however, does not ensure high rates
of economic growth. In most cases, sustained high rates of growth also
depend upon key structural measures, such as regulatory reform, privatization,
civil service reform, improved governance, trade liberalization, and banking
sector reform, many of which are discussed at length in thePoverty
Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, published by the World Bank.3Moreover, growth alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction. Growth
associated with progressive distributional changes will have a greater
impact on poverty than growth that leaves distribution unchanged. Hence,
policies that improve the distribution of income and assets within a society,
such as land tenure reform, pro-poor public expenditure, and measures
to increase the poor’s access to financial markets, will also form
essential elements of a country’s poverty reduction strategy.4 
 
Box 1. Definition and Measurement of Poverty 
 
The World Bank’s 2000 World Development Report defines
poverty as an unacceptable deprivation in human well-being
that can comprise both physiological and social deprivation.
Physiological deprivation involves the non-fulfillment of
basic material or biological needs, including inadequate nutrition,
health, education, and shelter. A person can be considered
poor if he or she is unable to secure the goods and services
to meet these basic material needs. The concept of physiological
deprivation is thus closely related to, but can extend beyond,
low monetary income and consumption levels. Social deprivation
widens the concept of deprivation to include risk, vulnerability,
lack of autonomy, powerlessness, and lack of self-respect.
Given that countries’ definitions of deprivation often
go beyond physiological deprivation and sometimes give greater
weight to social deprivation, local populations (including
poor communities) should be engaged in the dialogue that leads
to the most appropriate definition of poverty in a country. 
 
To safeguard macroeconomic stability, the government budget, including
the country’s poverty reduction strategies, must be financed in a
sustainable, noninflationary manner. The formulation and integration of
a country’s macroeconomic policy and poverty reduction strategy are
iterative processes. Poverty reduction strategies need first to be articulated
(i.e., objectives and policies specified), then costed, and finally financed
within the overall budget in a noninflationary manner. The amount of finance,
much of which will be on concessional terms, is, however, not necessarily
fixed during this process: if credible poverty reduction strategies cannot
be financed from available resources, World Bank and IMF staff should
and will actively assist countries in their efforts to raise additional
financial support from the donor community. Nonetheless, in situations
where financing gaps remain, a country would have to revisit the intermediate
objectives of their strategy and reexamine their priorities. Except in
cases where macroeconomic imbalances are severe, there will usually be
some scope for flexibility in setting short-term macroeconomic targets.
However, the objective of macroeconomic stability should not be compromised. 
 
2. The Links Between Macroeconomic
Policy and Poverty Reduction: Growth Matters 
 
Economic growth is thesingle most important factorinfluencing
poverty. Numerous statistical studies have found a strong association
between national per capita income and national poverty indicators, using
both income and nonincome measures of poverty.5One recent study consisting of 80 countries covering four decades found
that, on average, the income of the bottom one-fifth of the population
rose one-for-one with the overall growth of the economy as defined by
per capita GDP (Dollar and Kraay, 2000). Moreover, the study found that
the effect of growth on the income of the poor was on average no different
in poor countries than in rich countries, that the poverty–growth
relationship had not changed in recent years, and that policy-induced
growth was as good for the poor as it was for the overall population.
Another study that looked at 143 growth episodes also found that the “growth
effect” dominated, with the “distribution effect” being
important in only a minority of cases (White and Anderson, forthcoming).
These studies, however, establish association, but not causation. In fact,
the causality could well go the other way. In such cases, poverty reduction
could in fact be necessary to implement stable macroeconomic policies
or to achieve higher growth. 
 
Studies show that capital accumulation by the private sector drives growth.6Therefore, a key objective of a country’s poverty reduction strategy
should be to establish conditions that facilitate private sector investment.
No magic bullet can guarantee increased rates of private sector investment.
Instead, in addition to a sustainable and stable set of macroeconomic
policies, a country’s poverty reduction policy agenda should, in
most cases, extend across a variety of policy areas, including privatization,
trade liberalization, banking and financial sector reforms, labor markets,
the regulatory environment, and the judicial system. The agenda will certainly
include increased and more efficient public investment in a country’s
health, education, and other priority social service sectors.7 
 
Macroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for Growth 
 
Macroeconomic stability is the cornerstone of any successful effort to
increase private sector development and economic growth (see
Box 2). Cross-country regressions using a large sample of countries
suggest that growth, investment, and productivity are positively correlated
with macroeconomic stability (Easterly and Kraay, 1999). Although it is
difficult to prove the direction of causation, these results confirm thatmacroeconomic instability has generally been associated with poor growth
performance. Without macroeconomic stability, domestic and foreign
investors will stay away and resources will be diverted elsewhere. In
fact, econometric evidence of investment behavior indicates that in addition
to conventional factors (i.e., past growth of economic activity, real
interest rates, and private sector credit), private investment is significantly
and negatively influenced by uncertainty and macroeconomic instability
(see, for example, Ramey and Ramey, 1995). 
 
Box 2. Macroeconomic Stability 
 
Macroeconomic stability exists when key economic relationships
are in balance—for example, between domestic demand and
output, the balance of payments, fiscal revenues and expenditure,
and savings and investment. These relationships, however,
need not necessarily be in exact balance. Imbalances such
as fiscal and current account deficits or surpluses are perfectly
compatible with economic stability provided that they can
be financed in a sustainable manner. 
 
There is no unique set of thresholds for each macroeconomic
variable between stability and instability. Rather, there
is a continuum of various combinations of levels of key macroeconomic
variables (e.g., growth, inflation, fiscal deficit, current
account deficit, international reserves) that could indicate
macroeconomic instability. While it may be relatively easy
to identify a country in a state of macroeconomic instability
(e.g., large current account deficits financed by short-term
borrowing, high and rising levels of public debt, double-digit
inflation rates, and stagnant or declining GDP) or stability
(e.g., current account and fiscal balances consistent with
low and declining debt levels, inflation in the low single
digits, and rising per capita GDP), there is a substantial
“gray area” in between where countries enjoy a degree
of stability, but where macroeconomic performance could clearly
be improved. 
 
Finally, macroeconomic stability depends not only on the
macroeconomic management of an economy, but also on the structure
of key markets and sectors. To enhance macroeconomic stability,
countries need to support macroeconomic policy with structural
reforms that strengthen and improve the functioning of these
markets and sectors. 
 
Macroeconomic Instability Hurts the Poor 
 
In addition to low (and sometimes even negative) growth rates, other
aspects of macroeconomic instability can place a heavy burden on the poor.
Inflation, for example, is a regressive and arbitrary tax, the burden
of which is typically borne disproportionately by those in lower income
brackets. The reason is twofold. First, the poor tend to hold most of
their financial assets in the form of cash rather than in interest-bearing
assets. Second, they are generally less able than are the better off to
protect the real value of their incomes and assets from inflation. In
consequence, price jumps generally erode the real wages and assets of
the poor more than those of the non-poor. Moreover, beyond certain thresholds,
inflation also curbs output growth, an effect that will impact even those
among the poor who infrequently use money for economic transactions.8In addition, low output growth that is typically associated with instability
can have a longer-term impact on poverty (a phenomenon known as “hysteresis”).
This phenomenon typically operates through shocks to the human capital
of the poor. In Africa, for instance, there is evidence that children
from poor families drop out of school during crises. Similarly, studies
for Latin American countries suggest that adverse terms-of-trade shocks
explain part of the decline of schooling attainment (see, for example,
Behrman, Duryea, and Szeleky, 1999). 
 
Composition and Distribution of Growth Also Matter 
 
Although economic growth is the engine of poverty reduction, it works
more effectively in some situations than in others.9Two key factors that appear to determine the impact of growth on poverty
are thedistributional patternsand thesectoral compositionof growth. 
 
If the benefits of growth are translated into poverty reduction through
the existing distribution of income, then more equal societies will bemore efficient transformers of growth into poverty reduction. A
number of empirical studies have found that the responsiveness of income
poverty to growth increases significantly as inequality is lowered.10This is also supported by a recent cross-country study that found that
the more equal the distribution of income in a country, the greater the
impact of growth on the number of people in poverty (Ravallion, 1997).
Others have suggested that greater equity comes at the expense of lower
growth and that there is a trade-off between growth and equity when it
comes to poverty reduction.11A large number
of recent empirical studies, however, have found that there is not necessarily
such a trade-off12and that equity in its
various dimensions is growth enhancing.13 
 
Thesectoral compositionof growth can determine the impact that
growth will have on poverty. Conventional wisdom has been that growth
in sectors of the economy where the poor are concentrated will have a
greater impact on reducing poverty than growth in other sectors—indeed,
this is almost a tautology. For example, it is often argued that in countries
where most of the poor live in rural areas, agricultural growth reduces
poverty because it generates income for poor farmers and increases the
demand for goods and services that can easily be produced by the poor.14Various country-specific and cross-country studies have shown that growth
in the agricultural and tertiary sectors has had a major effect on reducing
poverty, while growth in manufacturing has not.15This reinforces the case for duty-free access to industrial country markets
for agricultural exports from low-income countries. The links may be more
complex over the long run, however. While faster growth in agriculture
may address rural poverty in the short-term, reliance on agricultural
activity may also intensify output variability, which, in turn, would
contribute to increasing rather than decreasing poverty. A more diversified
economy with a vibrant manufacturing sector might offer the best chances
for a sustainable improvement in living standards in the long run. 
 
What are the implications of these empirical findings for macroeconomic
policy? First, in light of the importance of growth for poverty reduction,
and of macroeconomic stability for growth, the broad objective of macroeconomic
policy should be the establishment, or strengthening, of macroeconomic
stability. Policymakers should therefore define a set of attainable macroeconomic
targets (i.e., growth, inflation, external debt, and net international
reserves) with the objective of maintaining macroeconomic stability, and
pursue macroeconomic policies (fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate) consistent
with those targets. In cases where macroeconomic imbalances are less severe,
a range of possible targets may be consistent with the objective of stabilization.
Precise targets can then be set within that range, in accordance with
the goals and priorities in the country’s poverty reduction strategy
(see the section on fiscal policy later in this pamphlet). 
 
Second, most developing countries will likely have substantial scope
for enhancing the quality of growth, that is, the degree to which the
poor share in the fruits of such growth, through policies aimed at improving
income distribution. These policies (e.g., land tenure reform, changes
in marginal and average tax rates, increases in pro-poor social spending,
etc.) often are politically charged, and usually require supporting structural
and governance reforms that would empower the poor to demand resources
and/or ensure that resources intended for them are not diverted to other
groups of the population. As these topics pertain more broadly to political
economy, rather than exclusively to macroeconomics, they are beyond the
scope of this pamphlet. But they reinforce the point that economic growth
alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction and that complementary redistributional
policies may be needed to ensure that the poor benefit from growth. 
 
Finally, while issues regarding the composition of growth also go beyond
strict macroeconomics, several general policy observations can be made.
There is a general consensus that policies that introduce distortions
in order to influence growth in a particular sector can hamper overall
growth. The industrial policies pursued by many African developing countries
in the 1960s have long been discredited (World Bank, 1982). Instead, strategies
for sector specific growth should focus on removing distortions that impede
growth in a particular sector. In addition, policymakers should implement
policies that will empower the poor and create the conditions that would
permit them to move into new as well as existing areas of opportunity,
thereby allowing them to better share in the fruits of economic growth.
The objectives of such policies should include creating a stable environment
and level playing field conducive to private sector investment and broad-based
economic growth; removing the cultural, social, and economic constraints
that prevent the poor from making full use of their existing asset base
and accessing markets; and increasing the human capital base of the poor
through the provision of basic health and education services. Using these
policies, and the redistributive policies described above, policymakers
can target “pro-poor” growth—that is, they can attempt
to maximize the beneficial impact of sustained economic growth on poverty
reduction. 
 
3. Macroeconomic Stability
and Economic Growth 
 
Broadly speaking, two considerations underlie macroeconomic policy recommendations.
First, there needs to be anassessment of the appropriate policystance to adopt in a given set of circumstances (i.e., should fiscal and/or
monetary policy be tightened or loosened?). Second, there is thechoice
of specific macroeconomic policy instrumentsthat would be beneficial
for a country to adopt (e.g., the use of a nominal anchor, a value-added
tax (VAT), etc.). In practice, these two considerations are closely linked.
Adjusting a policy stance is often done via the adoption of a new instrument
(or the modification of an existing one). More important, both considerations
are essential to efforts to enhance an economy’s stability. 
 
The specific stance must fit each country’s particular situation.
These situations can be put into three broad classes: (1) instability/disequilibrium;
(2) stabilization (e.g., transition from instability to stability); and
(3) stability/steady economic growth. This Section briefly discusses how
macroeconomic policies can contribute to stability. For countries that
enjoy stable macroeconomic conditions, there is somewhat greater flexibility
in the choice of appropriate stance for macroeconomic policy. The central
issue for these countries will be to ensure that the financing of their
poverty reduction strategies does not jeopardize macroeconomic stability,
which will be discussed in the last section of this pamphlet. 
 
Sources of Instability 
 
There are two main sources of economic instability, namely exogenous
shocks and inappropriate policies. Exogenous shocks (e.g., terms of trade
shocks, natural disasters, reversals in capital flows, etc.) can throw
an economy into disequilibrium and require compensatory action. For example,
many low income countries have a narrow export base, often centered on
one or two key commodities. Shocks to the world price of these commodities
can therefore have a strong impact on the country’s income. Even
diversified economies, however, are routinely hit by exogenous shocks,
although, reflecting their greater diversification, shocks usually need
to be particularly large or long-lasting to destabilize such an economy.
Alternatively, a disequilibrium can be “self-induced” by poor
macroeconomic management. For example, an excessively loose fiscal stance
can increase aggregate demand for goods and services, which places pressure
on the country’s external balance of payments as well as on the domestic
price level. At times, economic crises are the result of both external
shocks and poor management. 
 
Stabilization 
 
In most cases, addressing instability (i.e., stabilization) will require
policyadjustment; whereby a government introduces new measures
(possibly combined with new policy targets) in response to the change
in circumstances.16Adjustment will typically
be necessary if the source of instability is a permanent (i.e., systemic)
external shock or the result of earlier, inappropriate macroeconomic policies.
However, if the source of instability can be clearly identified as a temporary
shock (e.g., a one-time event) then it may be appropriate for a country
to accommodate it.17Identifying whether
a particular shock is temporary or is likely to persist is easier said
than done. Since there is often a considerable degree of uncertainty surrounding
such a judgment, it is usually wise to err somewhat on the side of caution
by assuming that the shock will largely persist and by basing the corresponding
policy response on the appropriate adjustment. 
 
In most circumstances where adjustment is necessary, both monetary (or
exchange rate) and fiscal instruments will have to be used. In particular,
successful adjustment to a permanent unfavorable shock that worsens the
balance of payments will often require a sustained tightening of the fiscal
stance, as this is the most immediate and effective way to increase domestic
savings and to reduce domestic demand—two objectives typically at
the center of stabilization programs. 
 
Adjustment policies may contribute to a temporary contraction of economic
activity, but this contingency should not be used to argue against implementing
adjustment policies altogether, as the alternative may be worse. Attempting
to sustain aggregate demand through unsustainable policies will almost
certainly aggravate the long-run cost of a shock, and could even fail
in the short run to the extent that it undermines confidence. In the long
run, greater benefits to the poor are to be had as a result of the restoration
of macroeconomic stability. The appropriate policies to protect the poor
during adjustment are to maintain, or even increase, social expenditures
and to adopt, where feasible, compensatory measures that would insulate
or offset temporary adverse impacts to the fullest extent possible.18This is best done by devoting resources to the establishment of effective
social safety nets,19as an enduring part
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy, rather than as a response
to crisis. Countries that lack such resources/safety nets could be forced
to either subject their poor to the short-term adverse effects of stabilization
or to delay the pace with which macroeconomic adjustment proceeds (and
put off the corresponding long-term benefits to economic growth and poverty
reduction). 
 
Countries in macroeconomic crisis typically have little choice but to
stabilize quickly, but for countries in the “gray” area of partial
stability, finding the right pace may prove difficult. In some cases,
a lack of financing will drive the pace of stabilization. Where financing
is not a constraint, however, policymakers will need to assess and carefully
weigh various factors on a case-by-case basis in choosing the most appropriate
pace of stabilization. 
 
Elements of Macroeconomic Stability 
 
Macroeconomic policies influence and contribute to the attainment of
rapid, sustainable economic growth aimed at poverty reduction in a variety
of ways. By pursuing sound economic policies, policymakers send clear
signals to the private sector. The extent to which policymakers are able
to establish atrack record of policy implementationwill influence
private sector confidence, which will, in turn, impact upon investment,
economic growth, and poverty outcomes. 
 
Prudent macroeconomic policies can result inlow and stable inflation.
Inflation hurts the poor by lowering growth and by redistributing real
incomes and wealth to the detriment of those in society least able to
defend their economic interests. High inflation can also introduce high
volatility in relative prices and make investment a risky decision. Unless
inflation starts at very high levels, rapid disinflation can also have
short-run output costs, which need to be weighed against the costs of
continuing inflation. 
 
By moving towarddebt sustainability, policymakers will help create
the conditions for steady and continuous progress on growth and poverty
reduction by removing uncertainty as to whether a government will be able
to service new debt. By keeping domestic and external debt at levels that
can be serviced in a sustainable manner without unduly squeezing nondebt
expenditure, policymakers can also ensure that adequate domestic resources
are available to finance essential social programs. 
 
Inappropriate exchange rate policies distort the composition of growth
by influencing the price of tradable versus nontradable goods. Household
survey data for a number of countries indicate that the poor tend to consume
higher amounts of nontradable goods while generating relatively more of
their income from tradable goods (Sahn, Dorosh, and Younger, 1997). Hence,
in addition to distorting trade and inhibiting growth, an overly appreciated
exchange rate can impair the relative incomes and purchasing power of
the poor. 
 
By building and maintaining anadequate level of net international
reserves, a country can weather a temporary shock without having to
reduce essential pro-poor spending. External shocks can be particularly
detrimental to the poor because they can lower real wages, increase unemployment,
reduce nonlabor income, and limit private and net government transfers.
The level of “adequate” reserves depends on the choice of exchange
rate regime. 
 
4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic
Policies and Poverty Outcomes 
 
Since the emphasis of this pamphlet is on the role of macroeconomic policy
in supporting a country’s poverty reduction strategy, the discussion
of macroeconomic policies in this section focuses on countries that have
broadly achieved macroeconomic stability. Recent data indicate that many
developing countries are presently in a state of macroeconomic stability
(seeTables 1–3at the end of this pamphlet). When
formulating a country’s poverty reduction strategy, policymakers
will need to assess and determine what is the most appropriate combination
of key macroeconomic targets that would preserve macroeconomic stability
in their particular circumstance. Three key issues are discussed in this
section: (1) how to finance poverty-reducing spending in a way that doesn’t
endanger macroeconomic stability; (2) what specific policies can be adopted
to improve macroeconomic performance; and (3) policies to protect the
poor from domestic and external shocks. 
 
Financing Poverty Reduction Strategies 
 
Once a country has developed a comprehensive and fully costed draft of
its poverty reduction strategy, it will need to ensure that the strategy
can be pursued and financed in a manner that does not jeopardize its macroeconomic
stability and growth objectives.20To do
so, policymakers need to integrate their poverty reduction and macroeconomic
strategies into a consistent framework. The following paragraphs present
a conceptual framework that could be useful to policymakers in determining
whether their poverty reduction strategy is consistent with their macroeconomic
objectives. 
 
Given that it is difficult to determine beforehand what the growth target
should be, policymakers may wish to consider developing alternative macroeconomic
scenarios that take into consideration possible variations in the rate
of economic growth. Such scenarios could be usefully discussed with stakeholders
and development partners with a view to assessing the impact of lower-than-projected
economic growth on key macroeconomic targets and poverty outcomes and
to developing appropriate contingencies. The most likely or “base
case” scenario would then be used as the basis for carrying out an
initial attempt aimed at integrating the macroeconomic and poverty reduction
strategies into a consistent framework. Once this has been accomplished,
similar exercises could be carried out regarding the other contingency
scenarios for reference during the implementation stage of the strategy. 
 
Figure 1shows the various macroeconomic linkages
and constraints within a country and highlights the main trade-offs facing
policymakers. The starting point is theinitial articulation of the
country’s poverty reduction strategy, based on discussions with
representatives of the government, stakeholders, and development partners.
Ideally, these discussions will have resulted in the development of a
comprehensive action plan that identifies priority sectoral policies to
be pursued in support of poverty reduction, including in the areas of
education, health, and rural infrastructure. Given that poverty is multidimensional,
the action plan will also likely include priority measures with regard
to governance, structural reform, and other relevant areas, each of which
may have budgetary implications. 
 
The first step will be to provide afull costing of the envisaged
poverty reduction strategy. A comprehensive system for budget formulation
of poverty reduction strategies requires the development of Medium-Term
Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF), which currently exist in only a limited
number of countries (e.g., Ghana and Uganda). Details regarding how such
costing exercises can be carried out are presented in Chapter 5 of thePoverty Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, “Public Spending for
Poverty Reduction”.21 
 
The second step involves an assessment of the government’s spending
program with regard to priority spending, nondiscretionary spending, and
discretionary nonpriority spending. In doing so, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas and away from nonproductive, nonpriority spending, as well as from
areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist. 
 
The third step involves an assessment of domestic and external sources
of budget finance. This would include a review of (1) the existing tax
and nontax revenue base, in-cluding the effect of any changes in the tax
system envisaged under the poverty reduction strategy; (2) the scope for
financing public spending through net domestic borrowing in light of the
need to maintain macroeconomic stability and to ensure adequate availability
of credit to the private sector in support of private sector development
and economic growth; and (3) the scope for external financing (e.g., grants,
net external borrowing, and debt relief) that is realistic and sustainable
under the present circumstances. 
 
Once policymakers have carried out these assessments, they can then determine
whether the desired poverty reduction strategy can be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s growth and stability objectives. In
this regard, it is important to note that there are no rigid, pre-determined
limits regarding a country’s fiscal stance (such as, for example,
“the budget deficit must not be more than ‘x’ percent of
GDP”). Rather, arriving at an appropriate, integrated poverty reduction
and macroeconomic framework will require juggling a large number of parameters
and weighing the trade-offs between multiple objectives. The linkages
inFigure 1are meant to illustrate that this is an
iterative process. In this regard, quantitative frameworks that could
assist policymakers in assessing the distributional implications of their
macroeconomic policies would be particularly useful. Such frameworks,
however, are presently only at a nascent stage of development (seeBox
3). 
 
Box 3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic Policies 
 
In developing poverty reduction strategies, policymakers
would benefit from a quantitative framework that they could
use to assess the distributional impact of the macroeconomic
policy options under consideration. Such a framework would
be useful because the links between macroeconomic policies
and poverty are complex. A quantitative framework that identifies
the critical relationships on which the outcome depends could
therefore assist countries in assessing these trade-offs. 
 
What would be some of the desirable characteristics of such
a quantitative framework? First, the framework should be capable
of identifying some of the critical trade-offs in poverty-reducing
macroeconomic policies. For example, how do the costs (in
terms of poverty) of higher spending (and higher fiscal deficits)
compare with the benefits of targeting that spending on the
poor? Second, the framework should be consistent with economic
theory on the one hand, and with basic data availability,
such as national accounts and household income and expenditure
surveys, on the other. Otherwise, the frameworks will not
be able to foster a dialogue between conflicting parties on
these issues. Third, and most important, the framework should
be simple enough that government officials can use it on their
desktop computers. This means that it should not make undue
demands on data, and it should be based on readily available
software, such as Microsoft ExcelTM. 
 
World Bank staff is presently developing alternative quantitative
frameworks that could be used to evaluate some of the macroeconomic
aspects of poverty reduction strategies.1It is expected that
other possible quantitative frameworks will be developed over
time that could assist country teams in this regard. 
 
1See Agenor and others (2000). In developing
this particular framework, the authors opted for a modular
approach that allows different models to be incorporated as
alternative sub-components of the overall framework. 
 
If there remains an imbalance between spending and expected financing
that could jeopardize the country’s macroeconomic growth and stability
objective, one option would be to ascertain the extent to which additional
external financing may be available. But, as discussed earlier, policymakers
would need to assess the extent to which accommodating such expenditure
could place pressure on the price of nontraded goods and jeopardize stability.
Since the development of a poverty reduction strategy involves a participatory
process that includes the country’s development partners, the case
for additional donor support can be examined. To the extent possible,
donors should be encouraged to make medium-term aid commitments in support
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy so that the country can
have confidence as it begins new spending programs that these activities
can be sustained.22 
 
If the desired poverty reduction program cannot be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s economic stability and growth objectives,
then policymakers will need to reconsider the parameters discussed above.
Key questions would include: Is there further scope for domestic revenue
mobilization? Can discretionary nonpriority spending be cut back more?
Is there scope for cutting back certain priority spending without undermining
the poverty reduction objective? Can the domestic financing target be
relaxed without jeopardizing macroeconomic stability or private sector
development objectives? Can the macroeconomic targets be modified in a
manner that would not undermine the interrelated objectives of rapid economic
growth, low and stable inflation, and poverty reduction? The answers to
these questions will determine the extent to which the desired poverty
reduction programs can be pursued in the current period. 
 
Fiscal Policy 
 
Fiscal policy can have a direct impact on the poor, both through the
government’s overall fiscal stance and through the distributional
implications of tax policy and public spending. Structural fiscal reforms
in budget and treasury management, public administration, governance,
transparency, and accountability can also benefit the poor in terms of
more efficient and better targeted use of public resources. As indicated
above, there is no rigid, pre-determined limit on what would be an appropriate
fiscal deficit. An assessment would need to be based on the particular
circumstances facing the country, its medium-term macroeconomic outlook,
and the scope for external budgetary assistance. The terms on which external
assistance is available are also important. There is a strong case, for
instance, for allowing higher grants to translate into higher spending
and deficits, to the extent that those grants can reasonably be expected
to continue in the future, and provided that the resources can be used
effectively. 
 
With regard to the composition of public expenditure, policymakers will
need to assess not only the appropriateness of the proposed poverty reduction
spending program, but also of planned nondiscretionary, and discretionary
nonpriority, spending. In so doing, they will need to take into particular
consideration the distributional and growth impact of spending in each
area and place due emphasis on spending programs that are pro-poor (e.g.,
certain programs in health, education, and infrastructure) and on the
efficient delivery of essential public services (e.g., public health,
public education, social welfare, etc.). In examining these expenditures,
policymakers should evaluate the extent to which government intervention
in general, and public spending in particular, can be justified on grounds
of market failure and/or redistribution. 
 
Policymakers must also ask themselves whether the envisaged public goods
or services can be delivered efficiently (e.g., targeted at the intended
beneficiaries) and, if not, whether appropriate mechanisms and/or incentives
can be put in place to ensure such efficient delivery. Countries should
begin by assessing in a frank manner their administrative capacity at
both the national and subnational levels to deliver well-targeted, essential
public services in support of poverty reduction. In this regard, policymakers
should consider the extent to which both technical assistance and the
private sector can play a role in improving the delivery of these services. 
 
In the context of medium-term budget planning, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas23and away from nonproductive spending,
including areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist.
Operation and maintenance expenditure tied to capital spending should
also be reviewed with a critical eye. The quality of public expenditure
could be assessed in the context of a public expenditure review with the
assistance of multilateral and/or bilateral donors. Policymakers could
then assess the new poverty reduction projects and activities that have
been identified in the context of the poverty reduction strategy and integrate
them into the preliminary spending program. In so doing, they should attempt
to rank the poverty programs in order of relative importance in line with
the country’s social and economic priorities, the market failure/redistribution
criteria identified above, and the country’s absorptive capacity
in the light of existing institutional and administrative constraints.
If spending cuts are deemed necessary in the context of the integrated
poverty reduction/macroeconomic framework, policymakers should refer back
to the ranking of the spending program based on the relative importance
and priority assigned to each activity. 
 
A key aspect of any poverty reduction strategy will be an assessment
of the impact of the present tax and nontax system on the poor. An important
medium-term objective for many developing countries will be to raise domestic
revenue levels with a view to providing additional revenue in support
of their poverty reduction strategies.24The existing revenue base should be reviewed relative to its capacity
to provide for the poverty spending requirements from nonbank domestic
financing. Revenues should be raised in as economically neutral a manner
as possible, while taking into consideration equity concerns and administrative
capacities (see Box 4). 
 
In a developing country , taking account of allocational effects means
that the tax system in particular should not attempt to affect savings
and investment—experience indicates that aggregate savings and investment
tend to be insensitive to taxes, with the result that the tax system typically
only affects the allocation of those aggregates across alternative forms.
As regards equity, the tax system should be assessed with respect to its
direct and indirect impact on the poor. It is difficult to have a tax
system that is both efficient and progressive, particularly in those countries
without a well-developed tax administration. Therefore, governments should
seek to determine a distribution of tax burdens seen as broadly fair rather
than use the tax system to achieve a drastic income redistribution. 
 
Box 4. Tax Policy 
 
The best tax systems typically include most or all of the
following elements: 
 
The use of a simplified regime for small businesses and the
informal sector may complement these major taxes. Real property
taxes may also be used if they can be administered appropriately,
though this may be difficult in developing countries. 
 
Tax policy should aim at moving toward a system of easily administered
taxes with broad bases and moderate marginal rates. To the extent that
some revenue provisions may be regressive, they should be offset through
the expenditure system (e.g., transitory, well-targeted food subsidies
could offset the impact of a broad-based consumption tax and cushion the
adverse impact of adjustment policies on the poor). Finally, where revenue
systems are being administered by a civil service that is highly constrained
in terms of human resources, technical support, and funding, countries
should rely heavily on final withholding, and keep to the absolute minimum
any exemptions, special provisions, or multiple rates. 
 
The scope for domestic budgetary financing will depend on a number of
factors, including the sustainable rate of monetary growth, the credit
requirements of the private sector, the relative productivity of public
investment, and the desired target for net international reserves. Sacrificing
low inflation (through faster monetary growth) to finance additional expenditure
is generally not an effective means to reduce poverty because the poor
are most vulnerable to price increases. At the same time, since private
sector development stands at the center of any poverty reduction strategy,
governments need to take into account the extent to which public sector
borrowing “crowds out” the private sector’s access to credit,
thereby undermining the country’s growth and inflation objectives.
At times, public sector borrowing can also “crowd in” private
sector investment by putting in place critical infrastructure necessary
for private enterprise to flourish. Given that at any point in time there
is a finite amount of credit available in an economy, policymakers must
therefore assess the relative productivity of public investment versus
private investment and determine the amount of domestic budgetary financing
that would be consistent with the need to maintain low inflation and support
sustainable economic growth. 
 
The amount and type of available external resources to finance the budget
will vary depending on the particular circumstances facing the country.
Countries that have access to external grants need to consider what amount
is available and sustainable under the present circumstances. The same
is true in the case of external debt, but policymakers also need to determine
whether the terms on such borrowing are appropriate and whether the added
debt burden is sustainable. To the extent that a country is benefiting
from, or may benefit from, external debt relief under the enhanced Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, net resource flows—flows
that are predictable over the medium term—will be freed up to finance
poverty-related budgetary expenditure. Domestic debt reduction could also
represent a viable use of additional concessional foreign assistance,
since it would both free up government resources to be directed at priority
poverty expenditure, as well as free up additional domestic credit for
use by the private sector. 
 
There may be a limit to the amount of additional external financing that
a country would deem to be appropriate, however. For example, there may
be absorptive capacity constraints that could drive up domestic wages
and prices, as well as appreciate the exchange rate and render the country’s
exports less competitive, thereby threatening both stability and growth.
The extent of such pressures will depend on how much of the additional
aid is spent on imports versus domestic nontraded goods and services.
There may also be uncertainty regarding aid flows, especially over the
medium term, as well as considerations regarding long-term dependency
on external official aid. In the absence of medium-term commitments of
aid, policymakers may therefore wish to be cautious in assuming what levels
of assistance would be forthcoming in the future. 
 
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies 
 
Monetary and exchange rate policies can affect the poor primarily through
three channels: inflation, output, and the real exchange rate. As mentioned
above, inflation hurts the poor because it acts as a regressive tax and
curbs growth. Fluctuations in output clearly have a direct impact upon
the incomes of the poor, and monetary and exchange rate policies affect
these fluctuations in two ways: first, changes in the money supply can
have a short-run effect on real variables such as the real interest rate,25which in turn affect output; and second, a country’s chosen exchange
rate regime can buffer, or amplify, exogenous shocks. Finally, the real
exchange rate can affect the poor in two ways.26First, it influences a country’s external competitiveness and hence
its growth rate. Second, a change in the real exchange rate (through,
for example, a devaluation of the nominal rate) can have a direct impact
on the poor.27 
 
Given that monetary and exchange rate policies affect the poor through
their impact on inflation, output, and the real exchange rate, it might
seem, at first glance, that such policies should therefore be used to
target all three of these variables. However, although monetary and exchange
rate policies may affect the poor through all of these channels, the monetary
authorities cannot necessarily control the size and nature of the resulting
impact. For example, changes in the money supply may affect output and
employment in the short run, but they do so in a way that is at best uncertain
and imperfectly understood. As a result, monetary authorities are typically
unable to exploit this impact systematically. Similarly, monetary and
exchange rate policies are unable to manipulate the real exchange rate
beyond a short period of time. Therefore, actively using these policies
to pursue a particular short-run exchange rate goal, which may be inconsistent
with underlying economic fundamentals, could introduce instability. 
 
Monetary and exchange rate policies should target those variables over
which they have the most control, namely the long-run impact of inflation
on the rate of growth. Broadly speaking, this can be achieved by setting
one objective for monetary and exchange rate policies: the attainment
and maintenance of a low and stable rate of inflation. In practice this
means (1) choosing, and firmly committing to, an inflation rate target
within the context of the overall poverty reduction strategy and the associated
macroeconomic framework; (2) adopting the required policies to achieve
the target; and (3) not using monetary and exchange rate policies to pursue,
overtly or otherwise, additional or alternative objectives. Formulated
and implemented in this way, monetary and exchange rate policies can form
the basis for a stable macroeconomic environment. 
 
Improving Inflation Performance 
 
In some cases, it may be desirable to target a lower rate of inflation.
What policies can help meet this objective? Ultimately, this question
has to be answered on a case-by-case basis. However, policymakers should
consider two general policies that are essential parts of any effort to
improve inflation performance: strong and sustained fiscal adjustment;
and the use of a nominal anchor and other measures (e.g., inflation targeting)
to enhance policy credibility. 
 
Fiscal Adjustment 
 
A loose fiscal stance can put upward pressure on prices through two channels:
aggregate demand and financing. Such a fiscal stance increases the demand
for domestic goods, which, in the absence of a corresponding increase
in supply, puts upward pressure on their prices. It can also increase
demand for imports, putting downward pressure on the value of the domestic
currency and, hence, (in a flexible exchange rate regime) upward pressure
on the prices of imported goods. Further, if the fiscal stance is financed
by printing money, this expands the money supply and tends to increase
inflation. 
 
In theory, if inflationary pressures from the fiscal stance are being
transmitted exclusively through the financing channel, then inflationary
pressures could be reduced without fiscal adjustment if alternative (sustainable)
sources of financing, such as external financing, are available. In practice,
however, some fiscal adjustment is typically also necessary because either
the amount of alternative finance is insufficient and/or the fiscal stance
is also putting upward pressure on prices through the aggregate demand
channel. Indeed, evidence shows that successful disinflation episodes
have typically been accompanied by sizable and sustained fiscal adjustment
(Phillips, 1999). Therefore, countries that wish to target a significantly
lower rate of inflation need to ensure that the corresponding fiscal adjustment
is adequate. 
 
Credibility and Nominal Anchors 
 
Setting policy targets is important. Consistently achieving those targets
is equally important. When targets under a policy are systematically missed,
the policy loses credibility. If a policy lacks credibility, the private
sector does not believe that the authorities are truly committed to their
policy targets, and hence does not fully factor the authorities’
targets into its inflation expectations, for instance when setting wage
bargains. This can result in an inflation bias—that is, higher inflation
outcomes brought on solely by the lack of policy credibility itself. 
 
Credibility can sometimes be enhanced by imposing restrictions on policy
(i.e., limiting the degree of discretion of the monetary authorities),
or by adopting specific institutional arrangements. For example, the adoption
of a fixed exchange rate regime involves a commitment to exchange domestic
currency for foreign currencies at a predefined rate. This imposes an
automatic discipline upon domestic monetary policy. In effect, control
over monetary policy is surrendered to the central bank of the country
whose currency has been chosen as the peg—typically a low inflation
country—which, in turn, imparts credibility to the domestic policy
objective of achieving low inflation. 
 
More generally, evidence shows that inflation performance has been better
in countries using a nominal anchor (Phillips, 1999). Using a nominal
anchor involves specifying and committing to a predetermined path for
a nominal variable—such as the exchange rate (i.e., the fixed exchange
rate discussed above is a nominal anchor) or a money aggregate—that
is to a certain degree under the control of the authorities.28If the variable threatens to deviate from its targeted path the authorities
take corrective action.29In this way,
inflation, and inflationary expectations, can be anchored. 
 
In some countries, fixed exchange rate regimes have clearly been
effective in establishing and maintaining low inflation. More generally,
there is empirical evidence that inflation performance has been better
in countries running fixed exchange rate regimes (see, for example, Ghosh
and others, 1999). However, the choice of a fixed exchange rate has to
be based on broader considerations than simply its merits as a nominal
anchor. In particular, the underlying structural features of an economy
need to be supportive of a fixed regime broadly speaking (for example,
the degree of price rigidity, the nature of its predominant exogenous
shocks, the degree of political support, etc.—these issues are discussed
below). Adopting a fixed exchange regime to serve only temporarily as
a nominal anchor can be risky. Exiting a fixed regime once inflation performance
is satisfactory can be difficult. Moreover, if a country’s economic
conditions are not supportive, or political support for the policy insufficient,
the peg could come under considerable pressure, which may, in the end,
force a costly abandonment of the regime and undermine the original objective
of stabilizing inflation. 
 
Both types of nominal anchors restrict the use of monetary instruments.30A standard critique has been that, although the use of a nominal anchor
may improve inflation performance, it comes at the cost of reducing the
discretion of the authorities to respond to short-run shocks. In practice
this trade-off may not be significant, however. Even if the monetary authorities
have full discretion,31as discussed above, their
ability to influence short-run output movements systematically is limited.
Moreover, their ability to exercise discretion is likely to be limited
by the need to preserve, or enhance, policy credibility. 
 
Inflation targeting has been adopted as the monetary regime in an
increasing number of industrialized and developing countries in recent
years. It is typically and preferably associated with a flexible exchange
rate system. Inflation targeting sets an inflation target for the central
bank and gives the responsibility for achieving the target to the central
bank. To enhance accountability, credibility, and efficiency, the central
bank in an inflation targeting regime is generally required to be extremely
transparent about its operations, explaining its decisions to the public,
publishing, in most cases, a regular inflation report. 
 
In the long run, however, only policies to which the authorities
are fully committed can be credible. Imposing restrictions on policy when
the necessary policy commitment is absent (or even when the private sector
erroneously suspects a lack of commitment) can have disastrous results.
For example, the private sector’s belief that a country’s authorities
are not committed to defending its fixed exchange rate may lead to a speculative
attack on the peg. Although devices may be used to accelerate the attainment
of a policy’s credibility, there is no substitute for commitment
to the policy, as demonstrated through sustained adherence to a prudent
macroeconomic stance. 
 
External Shocks and the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime 
 
The choice of exchange rate regime—fixed or flexible—depends
crucially on the nature of the economic shocks that affect the economy,
as well as the structural features of the economy, which may either mitigate
or amplify these shocks. Choosing a fixed exchange rate regime when these
underlying features of the economy are not supportive leaves a country
more exposed to the possibility of an external crisis, which can result
in the ultimate abandonment of the peg. In addition, shocks to output
can have a strong impact on the poor. Since different exchange rate regimes
have different insulating properties vis-à-vis certain types of
shocks, choosing the regime that best insulates the economy will serve
to moderate fluctuations in output, and thereby best serve the poor. 
 
For example, if the predominant source of disturbance to an economy is
shocks to the terms of trade, a flexible exchange rate regime may be best
because the nominal exchange rate is free to adjust in response to the
shock and bring the real exchange rate to its new equilibrium (see, for
example, Devarajan and Rodrik, 1992). Alternatively, if domestic monetary
shocks predominate, such as shocks to the demand for money, output may
be best insulated by a fixed exchange rate that allows these shocks to
be absorbed by fluctuations in international reserves. Of course, one
of the challenges facing the policymaker is to identify which shocks are
in fact predominant in a particular economy. 
 
The structural features of the economy may also affect the impact a particular
shock has on the economy, as well as the insulating properties of exchange
rate regimes. For example, if an economy is characterized by a significant
degree of nominal wage rigidity, wages will not fully adjust (at least
in the short run) in response to small real shocks, and hence the effect
of those shocks on output will be amplified. In these circumstances, even
if domestic monetary shocks are important, a flexible exchange rate regime
may well be preferable (in contrast to the conclusions above). Another
important structural feature is the degree of an economy’s openness.
Typically the more open an economy is, the greater is its exposure to
external shocks. This would argue generally in favor of a flexible exchange
rate regime. However, if an open economy is sufficiently diversified (i.e.,
it trades a wide range of goods and services) and if its prices are sufficiently
flexible, then a fixed exchange rate may be preferable because the volatility
of flexible exchange rates may impede international trade, and thus lower
external demand (although the evidence on this is mixed). In conclusion,
these various pros and cons of fixed versus flexible exchange rate regimes
need to be carefully assessed and weighed on a case-by-case basis—again,
there is no universal “right answer.” 
 
Policies to Insulate the Poor Against Shocks 
 
Given that the poor are adversely affected by macroeconomic shocks, what
should governments do about it? The question can be divided into two parts:
How should economic policy be designed to cushion the impact of shocks
on the poor, in particular during times of crisis and/or adjustment? What
specific policies can governments undertake to insulate the poor from
the consequences of shocks by removing existing distortive policies? 
 
Social Safety Nets 
 
Sound macroeconomic policies will help a country to reduce its exposure
to macroeconomic shocks, but there is no cost-effective policy that will
insure againstallpossible shocks. It is therefore crucial to
havesocial safety netsin place to ensure that poor households
are able to maintain minimum consumption levels and access to basic social
services during periods of crisis. Social safety net measures are also
necessary to protect the poor from shocks imposed on them during periods
of economic reform and adjustment.32Safety
nets include public work programs, limited food subsidies, transfers to
compensate for income loss, social funds, fee waivers, and scholarships
for essential services such as education and health. The specific mix
of measures will depend on the particular characteristics of the poor
and their vulnerability to shocks and should be well-targeted and designed
in most cases to provide temporary support. 
 
Equally important, the resources allocated to social safety nets should
be protected during economic crises and/or adjustment, when fiscal tightening
may be necessary. Governments should have budgetary guidelines approved
by their legislatures that prioritize and protect poverty-related programs
during periods of crisis and provide a clear course of action that ensures
access of the poor to basic social services during periods of austerity
(see Lustig, forthcoming). As will be discussed below, countercyclical
fiscal policies can also ensure the availability of funds for financing
safety nets during crises. 
 
Another important factor to consider is that safety nets should already
be operating before economies get hit by shocks so that they can be effective
in times of distress (for a more detailed account, see World Bank, 2000).
However, if a shock occurs before appropriate safety nets have been developed,
then “second-best” social protection policies may be necessary.
For instance, food subsidies have been found to be inefficient and often
benefiting the non-poor, and most reform programs call for their reduction
or even elimination. However, after a severe shock such as the 1997–98
East Asian financial crisis, when countries like Indonesia lacked comprehensive
safety nets, existing food subsidies were probably the only means of preventing
widespread malnutrition and starvation. In the context of a country’s
reform process, however, these subsidies should be replaced with better
targeted and less distorting transfers to the poor. 
 
Removing Market Distortions and Distortive Policies 
 
In addition to pursuing favorable economic policies and putting in place
appropriate social safety nets, there are specific structural reforms
that governments can undertake to insulate the poor from the adverse consequences
of shocks. Most of these have to do with addressing the mechanisms through
which macroeconomic shocks are transmitted to the poor. (see
Box 5). 
 
To the extent that asset market distortions prevent the poor from saving
and insulating themselves against shocks, policies to remove these distortions
can be valuable.33For instance, foreign
exchange controls can force the poor to hold their assets in domestic
currency, whose value typically declines with adverse shocks. Relaxing
these controls in a well-managed fashion could give the poor access to
safer assets, such as foreign currency, that could protect them from devaluations,
a typical outcome following negative shocks.34Similarly, severe financial repression, such as controlled interest rates,
can impede the poor’s ability to save.35If properly managed, financial liberalization policies can therefore have
the additional benefit of increasing self-insurance for the poor. 
 
Box 5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission Channels 
 
Credit markets, as well as safe asset markets for appropriate
saving, are major instruments for coping with income volatility.
Distortions in these markets curtail the ability of the poor
to follow consumption smoothing patterns. Government behavior
in response to shocks is also a major determinant of the effects
of these shocks on the poor. Financial sector behavior can
also amplify the effects of shocks. 
 
1For example,
in Ethiopia, livestock prices (often the poor’s only
asset) fall during a drought because all farmers are selling
their cattle to compensate for the bad harvest. 
 
Policies that increase borrower information and relax barriers to access
to credit markets can help the poor reduce consumption volatility, since
credit availability makes them less dependent on current income. Also,
to the extent that collateralized credit allocation amplifies the effects
of negative shocks by reducing small- and medium-sized firms’ access
to credit when asset prices fall (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1977, and Izquierdo,
1999), policies promoting better financial-sector credit allocation mechanisms
based on project profitability and borrower information could reduce the
incidence of this particular transmission channel and its indirect effects
on the poor (i.e., lower employment opportunities).36 
 
Finally, and most important, governments can do a lot to reduce the pro-cyclical
nature of their fiscal policies by saving rather than spending windfalls
following positive shocks and ideally using those savings as a buffer
for expenditures against negative shocks. A cautious approach would be
for the government to “treat every favorable shock as temporary and
every adverse one as permanent,” although judgment would also depend
on, among other things, the availability of financing (Little, and others,
1993). However, even this rule of thumb may not be enough. Governments
need to find ways of “tying their hands” to resist the pressure
to spend windfall revenues (Devarajan, 1999). For example, when the source
of revenue is publicly owned, such as oil or other natural resource, it
may be appropriate to save the windfall revenues abroad, with strict rules
on how much of it can be repatriated. Countries such as Colombia, Chile,
and Botswana have tried variants of this strategy, with benefits not just
for overall macroeconomic management, but also for protecting the poor
during adverse shocks, since saved funds during good times can be applied
to financing of safety nets during crisis. 
 
1There has been an emerging
consensus on how to make actions at the country level, and the support
of development partners, more effective in bringing about sustainable
poverty reduction. This consensus indicates a need for poverty reduction
strategies that are country-driven, with broad participation of civil
society, elected officials, key donors, and relevant international finance
institutions; outcome-oriented; and developed from an understanding of
the nature and determinants of poverty. Under the new framework, the country-led
strategy would be presented in a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP),
which is expected to become a key instrument for a country’s relations
with the donor community.2Macroeconomic stability is
a situation where key economic relationships are broadly in balance and
sustainable.3The sourcebook is available
at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.4These points are reflected
in the design of programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF), which are derived from a country’s own poverty
reduction strategy. The strategy itself should be based upon fully integrated
macroeconomic, structural, and social policies. SeeKey Features of
IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs,
August 16, 2000, available at http://www.imf.org/external/ np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.5Examples include the relationship
between infant mortality rates and per capita income, the ratio of female
to male literacy and per capita income, and average consumption and the
incidence of income poverty. In all three cases, national poverty indicators
improved as per capita income rose. See the discussion in the World Bank’sWorld Development Report, 2000.6Devarajan, Swaroop, and Zou
(1997) and Devarajan, Easterly, and Pack (forthcoming).7There is little empirical
evidence, however, that public sector capital expenditure has a positive
impact on growth, reflecting the tendency for such investment in the past
to be wasteful or inefficient. This does not mean public investment is
unimportant—only that efficiency considerations must be central in any
public investment program. See Easterly and Rebelo (1993), Devarajan,
Swaroop, and Zou (1997).8Empirical evidence confirms
a strong negative relationship between inflation and economic growth at
all but the lowest levels of inflation. See Fischer (1993), Bruno and
Easterly (1998), Ghosh and Phillips (1998), and Sarel (1996).9For any given increment in
per capita income, the impact on poverty will depend on how that increment
is distributed across the population. While growth is almost always accompanied
by a reduction in income poverty, and negative growth is accompanied by
an increase in poverty, for any given growth rate the impact on poverty
can vary substantially.10Ravallion (1997), Datt and
Ravallion (1992), and Kakwani (1993).11To the extent that people
with high income save a larger proportion of their income than do those
with low income, policies that redistribute income in favor of the lower-income
population may impede savings and, to the extent that such savings are
channeled into productive investment, long-term growth.12This refers to developing
economies, where often income (and wealth) inequality is particularly
acute. In general, there is likely to be a point beyond which greater
equity is incompatible with adequate labor and enterprise incentives,
which, in turn, would be detrimental to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik
(1994); Bénabou (1996); Birdsall and Londoño (1997); Deninger and Squire
(1998); Perotti (1992, 1993, and 1996); and Persson and Tabellini (1994).13By increasing the human
capital of the poor, redistributive policies can increase the productivity
of the workforce, thereby enhancing growth. Others have argued that there
is also a political economy channel as well—in countries with greater
income equality there is greater political support for public policies
that are more conducive to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik (1994), and
Persson and Tabellini (1994). For empirical support for this effect, see
Deininger (1999); Thomas and Wang (1998); Klasen (1999); and Dollar and
Gatti (1999). For dissenting views, see Forbes (2000) and Li, Xie, and
Zou (1999).14It is also often argued
that if growth results in the expansion of low-skilled employment, then
the poor are more likely to be the beneficiaries of the growth. One recent
cross-country study (Fallon and Hon, 1999) found that the more labor-intensive
the growth pattern, the faster the decline in the incidence of poverty.15Datt and Ravallion (1998),
Thorbecke and Jung (1996), Timmer (1997), and Bourguignon and Morrisson
(1998).16In certain cases, the return
to a steady growth state may also require structural reform and measures
to improve the functioning of markets.17Broadly speaking, this means
leaving the underlying stance of macroeconomic policy unchanged (or, in
some cases, the stance may be adjusted temporarily to mitigate the impact
of the shock) and adjusting policy targets in a way that takes into account
the impact of the shock. However, if such a policy stance cannot be financed
in a noninflationary way, then some adjustment will also be necessary.18Indeed, a key feature of
programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) is to assess the distributional impact of key macroeconomic policies
and to put in place countervailing measures needed to protect the poor.
SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
Supported Programs, August 16, 2000 at http://www.imf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.19Social safety nets are designed
to mitigate possible adverse effects of reform measures on the poor. These
instruments include temporary arrangements, as well as existing social
protection measures reformed and adapted for this purpose, such as limited
food subsidies, social security arrangements for dealing with various
life cycle and other contingencies, and targeted public works. See Chu
and Gupta (1998).20Even if the strategy can
be fully financed with concessional resources, policymakers will need
to assess the degree to which poverty-reducing spending may place pressure
on the price of nontraded goods and thereby threaten stability.21TheSourcebookcan
be found at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.22Ensuring there is appropriate
flexibility in fiscal targets and supporting authorities’ efforts to secure
commitments of higher donor flows when warranted are key features of the
IMF’s PRGF-supported programs. SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs, August 16, 2000, at
http://www.inf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/ eng/key.htm.23"Priority areas" are defined
as those activities identified as crucial for poverty reduction.24For a discussion of tax
policy and developing countries, see Tanzi and Zee (2000).25The real interest rate represents
the real cost of borrowing—that is, the cost in terms of goods—and is
approximately equal to the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate
of inflation.26The real exchange rate represents
the relative price of a basket of goods in two countries. It is commonly
measured by multiplying the nominal exchange rate by the ratio of consumer
price indices in the two countries. If the real exchange rate appreciates,
the basket of goods becomes more expensive in the home country. This can
happen if either the home currency appreciates, or if the home country’s
prices rise relative to those of the foreign country.27For example, as indicated
earlier, recent studies have shown that in some countries, the income
of the poor is more associated with tradable goods and consumption with
nontradable goods than the income and consumption patterns of other income
groups. In these countries, this implies that a depreciation or devaluation
of the domestic currency would make the country’s exports more attractive
and stimulate demand for tradable goods. Since the poor’s incomes are
tied to the production and export of tradables, this would, in turn, increase
their income while the cost of their consumption of nontradables would
remain unchanged.28Other nominal variables
can also serve as anchors. What is essential is that the variable targeted
be nominal, and not real, since real variables cannot provide an anchor
for nominal prices. For example, countries that have targeted the real
exchange rate have generally had worse inflation performance than other
countries. See Phillips (1999).29The two most commonly used
nominal anchors are a fixed exchange rate and a money aggregate (such
as reserve money or broad money). Under a fixed exchange rate regime,
whenever the market rate threatens to depart from the predetermined rate,
the monetary authorities buy or sell foreign exchange for the domestic
currency to ensure that the exchange rate remains fixed. Similarly, under
a monetary anchor the monetary authorities specify a predetermined path
for a monetary aggregate, and tighten or loosen the monetary stance when
the aggregate threatens to depart from that path.30Under a fixed exchange rate,
the monetary authorities give up control of the money supply. Under a
monetary anchor, the authorities cannot pursue an exchange rate target.31If there are no explicit
policy targets, the monetary authorities have full discretion. This differs
from the concept of independence of the monetary authorities.32Reform programs should be
designed with the poor and vulnerable in mind. The mix and sequencing
of reform measures should be designed to minimize the hardships brought
about by the program. The appropriate mix and sequencing cannot, however,
ensure that the adverse effects will be removed entirely and, hence, social
safety nets are needed to mitigate possible short-run adverse effects
on the poor. In some cases, it may be appropriate to delay reforms until
adequate safety net measures can be put in place. See Chu and Gupta (1998).33Contrary to what some may
believe, the poor do save, to smooth consumption over time, as well as
to guard against adverse shocks. For a recent analysis, see Deaton and
Paxson (2000).34Also, capital controls that
drive a wedge between domestic and world real interest rates make it possible
to extract an inflation tax, which especially hurts the poor.35For many countries, domestic
asset holdings of the poor are mainly composed of currency, so it would
seem that this channel is not relevant. But this may just reflect that
low controlled interest rates provide a disincentive to save in bank deposits.
Removing financial distortions could shift the allocation of domestic
assets in favor of deposits and, to the extent that market interest rates
account for expected inflation, insulate the poor’s savings from inflation.36Collateralization may be
initially the only way for small firms to gain access to credit markets,
but its amplification effects should not be understated. Instead, policies
that reduce informational problems (i.e., the reason for collateralization)
should be implemented. 
 
The following three tables show macroeconomic data, such as GDP growth,
for a range of developing countries. The tables reveal that many developing
countries are in a state of macroeconomic stability. 
 
Source: Country authorities 
 
Source: Country authorities 
 
Source: Data provided by the authorities.1Negative sign indicates a primary deficit. 
 
References 
 
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, Shantayanan Devarajan, William Easterly, Hippolyte
Fofack, Delfin Go, Alejandro Izquierdo, Lodovico Pizzati, 2000, “A
Macroeconomic Framework for Poverty Reduction Strategies,” Development
Research Group and World Bank Institute (unpublished; Washington: World
Bank). 
 
Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1994, “Distributive Politics
and Economic Growth,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
109 (May), pp. 465–90. 
 
Balassa, Bela, 1981, “The Newly Industrializing Developing Countries
after the Oil Crisis,”WeltwirtschaftlichesArchiv, Vol. 117,
No.1, pp. 142–94. 
 
Behrman, Jere, Suzanne Duryea, and Miguel Szeleky, 1999, “Schooling
Investments and Macroeconomic Conditions: A Micro-Macro Investigation
for Latin America and the Caribbean” (unpublished; Washington: Inter-American
Development Bank). 
 
Bénabou, Roland, 1996, “Inequality and Growth,” inNBER
Macroeconomics Annual: Volume II, ed. by Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press). 
 
Birdsall, Nancy, and Juan Luis Londoño, 1997, “Asset Inequality
Matters: An Assessment of the World Bank’s Approach to Poverty Reduction,”American Economic Review, Vol. 87(May), pp. 32–37. 
 
Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson, 1998, “Inequality
and Development: The Role of Dualism,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 57 (December), pp. 233–57. 
 
Bourguignon, François, William H. Branson, and Jaime de Melo,
1989,Macroeconomic Adjustment and Income Distribution: A Macro- Micro
Simulation Model(Paris: OECD Development Centre). 
 
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1998, “Inflation Crises and
Long-Run Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 41(February),
pp. 3–26. 
 
Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises:
The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”Journal of Applied Economics,
Vol. 1 (November), pp. 35–54. 
 
Chu, Ke-young, and Sanjeev Gupta, eds., 1998,Social Safety Nets:
Issues and Recent Experiences(Washington: International Monetary
Fund). 
 
Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning, 1999, “Explaining African
Economic Performance,”Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
37 (March), pp. 64–111. 
 
———, and associates, 1999,Trade Shocks in Developing
Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
 
Datt, Gaurav, and Martin Ravallion, 1992, “Growth and Redistribution
Components of Changes in Poverty Measures: A Decomposition with Applications
to Brazil and India in the 1980s,”Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 38 (April), pp. 275–95. 
 
———, 1998, “Farm Productivity and Rural Poverty in
India,”Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 34 (April), pp.
62–85. 
 
Deaton, A., and C. Paxson, 2000, “Growth and Saving Among Individuals
and Households,”Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
82 (May), pp. 212–25. 
 
Deininger, Klaus, 1999, “Asset Distribution, Inequality, and Growth,”
Development Research Group (Washington: World Bank). 
 
________, and Lyn Squire, 1998, “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues:
Inequality and Growth,”Journal of Development EconomicsVol.
57 (December), pp. 259–87. 
 
Devarajan, Shantayanan, 1999, “Cameroon,” inTrade Shocks
in Developing Countries, ed. by Paul Collier and Jan Gunning (Oxford:
Oxford University Press). 
 
________, William R. Easterly, and Howard Pack, forthcoming “Is
Investment in Africa Too Low or Too High?”,Journal of African
Economies. 
 
Devarajan, Shantayanan, and Dani Rodrik, 1992, “Do the Benefits
of Fixed Exchange Rates Outweigh Their Costs? The CFA Zone in Africa,”
inOpen Economies: Structural Adjustment and Agriculture, ed. by
Ian Goldin and L. Alan Winters (Cambridge, New York, and Melbourne: Cambridge
University Press). 
 
Dollar, David, and Roberta Gatti, 1999, “Gender Inequality, Income
and Growth: Are Good Times Good for Women?” Policy Research Report
on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 1. (Washington: World
Bank). 
 
Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, 2000, “Growth Is Good for the Poor,”
World Bank Development Research Group (unpublished; Washington, D.C.,
World Bank). 
 
Easterly, William, and Aart Kraay, 1999, “Small States, Small Problems?”
Policy Research Working Paper No. 2139, Development Research Group (Washington:
World Bank). 
 
Easterly, William, and Sergio Rebelo, 1993, “Fiscal Policy and Economic
Growth: An Empirical Investigation,”Journal of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 32 (December), pp. 417–58. 
 
Fallon, Peter, and Vivian Hon, 1999, “Poverty and Labor-Intensive
Growth.” Note prepared forWorld Development Report 2000/2001(unpublished; Washington: World Bank). 
 
Fischer, Stanley, 1993, “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32 (December), pp. 485–512. 
 
Forbes, Kristin, 2000, “A Reassessment of the Relationship Between
Inequality and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 90
(September), pp. 869–887. 
 
Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan Ostry, and Holger Wolf, 1999,
“Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?” (unpublished;
Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
 
Ghosh, Atish, and Steven Phillips, 1998, “Warning: Inflation May
Be Harmful to Your Growth,”IMF Staff Papers, International
Monetary Fund, Vol. 45 (December), pp. 672–710. 
 
Hausmann, Ricardo, 1999, “Managing Terms of Trade Volatility,”
World Bank PREM Note No. 18, February (Washington: World Bank). 
 
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 1995 “Overcoming Volatility,”
Economic and Social Progress in Latin America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press). 
 
Izquierdo, Alejandro, 1999, “Credit Constraints and the Asymmetric
Behavior of Asset Prices and Output under External Shocks,” (Doctoral
Dissertation, University of Maryland). 
 
Kakwani, Nanak, 1993, “Poverty and Economic Growth with Application
to Côte d’Ivoire,”Review of Income and Wealth,
Vol. 39 (June) pp. 121–139. 
 
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105 (April), pp. 211–48. 
 
Klasen, Stephan, 1999, “Does Gender Inequality Reduce Growth and
Development? Evidence from Cross-Country Regressions,” Policy Research
Report on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 7. (Washington:
World Bank). 
 
Li, Hongyi, Danyang Xie, Heng-fu Zou, 1999. “Dynamics of Income
Distribution,” Development Research Group, (unpublished; Washington:
World Bank). 
 
Little, I., R. Cooper, W. M. Corden, and S. Rajapatirana, 1993, Boom,
Crisis and Adjustment:The Macroeconomic Experience of Developing Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
 
Lustig, Nora, forthcoming. “Crises and the Poor: Socially Responsible
Macroeconomics.” Economia, Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic Association. 
 
Malmberg Calvo, Christina, 1998, Options for Managing and Financing Rural
Transport Infrastructure, World Bank Technical Paper No. 411 (Washington:
World Bank). 
 
Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastano, and Sunil Sharma, 1997, “The Scope
for Inflation Targeting in Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper
No. 97/130 (Washington: International Monetary Fund). 
 
Mitra, Pradeep, 1994,Adjustment in Oil-Importing Developing Countries(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
 
Perotti, Roberto, 1992, “Income Distribution: Politics and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 82 (May), pp. 311–16. 
 
———, 1993, “Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution,
and Growth.”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60 (October),
pp 755–76. 
 
———, 1996, “Redistribution and Non-consumption Smoothing
in an Open Economy,”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 63 (July),
pp 411–33. 
 
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1994, “Is Inequality Harmful
for Growth?”American Economic Review, Vol. 84 (June), pp.
600–21. 
 
Phillips, Steven, 1999, “Inflation: The Case for a More Resolute
Approach” inEconomic Adjustment and Reform in Low-Income Countries:
Studies by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund,”ed.
by Hugh Bredenkamp and Susan Schadler (Washington: International Monetary
Fund). 
 
Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey, 1995, “Cross-Country Evidence
on the Link between Volatility and Growth,”American Economic
Review, Vol. 85 (December), pp. 1138–51. 
 
Ravallion, Martin, 1997, “Can High-Inequality Developing Countries
Escape Absolute Poverty?” Policy Research Working Paper No. 1775
(Washington: World Bank). 
 
Sahn, David, Paul Dorosh, and Stephen Younger, 1997,Structural Adjustment
Reconsidered: Economic Policy and Poverty in Africa, (New York: Cambridge
University Press). 
 
Sarel, Michael, 1996, “Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Economic
Growth,”Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 43
(March), pp. 199–215. 
 
Tanzi, Vito, and Howell Zee, 2000, “Tax Policy for Emerging Markets:
Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper No. 00/35 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund). 
 
Thomas, Vinod, and Yan Wang, 1998, “Missing Lessons of East Asia:
Openness, Education, and the Environment,” Latin America and Caribbean
Studies: Proceedings series (Washington: World Bank). 
 
Thorbecke, Erik, and Hong-Sang Jung, 1996, “A Multiplier Decomposition
Method to Analyze Poverty Alleviation,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 48 (March), pp. 279–300. 
 
Timmer, C. Peter, 1997, “How Well Do the Poor Connect to the Growth
Process?” Consulting Assistance on Economic Reform Discussion Paper
No. 178. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Institute for International Development). 
 
White, Howard, and Edward Anderson, forthcoming, “Growth Versus
Distribution: Does the Pattern of Growth Matter?”, Institute of Development
Studies, University of Sussex. 
 
World Bank, 1982,Accelerated Development in Sub-Saharan Africa(Washington: World Bank). 
 
World Bank, 2000,World Development Report(New York and Washington:
Oxford University Press and World Bank). 
 
HomeWhat's NewSite MapSite IndexAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublicationsCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyHow to Contact Usعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
What's New 
 
Site Map 
 
Site Index 
 
Contact Us 
 
Glossary 
 
Home 
 
About the IMF 
 
Research 
 
Country Info 
 
News 
 
Videos 
 
Data and Statistics 
 
Publications 
 
A broad-based consumption tax, such as a VAT, preferably
with a single rate, minimal exemptions, and a threshold
to exclude smaller enterprises from taxation. The VAT generally
should extend through the retail sector, and should apply
equally to domestic production and imported goods and services.
The VAT should cover agricultural products and inputs, subject
to the threshold, which will exclude small farmers. 
 
Excise taxesshould apply to petroleum products,
alcohol, and tobacco; should be collected at the point of
production or import; and should apply equally to domestic
production and imports. 
 
Taxes on international tradeshould play a minimal
role. Import tariffs should have a low average rate and
a limited dispersion of rates, to reduce arbitrary and excessive
rates of protection. Exemptions should be kept at a minimum
and nontariff barriers should be avoided altogether. Exporters
should have duties rebated on imported inputs used for producing
exports and export duties should generally be avoided. 
 
The personal income taxshould be characterized
by only a few brackets and a moderate top marginal rate,
by limited personal exemptions and deductions, by a standard
exemption that excludes persons with low incomes, and by
extensive use of final withholding. 
 
The corporate income taxshould be levied at one
moderate rate. Depreciation allowances should be uniform
across sectors, and there should be minimal use of tax incentives
other than permitting net operating losses to be carried
forward for some reasonable period of time. 
 
Distortions in asset markets. To self-insure against
shocks, agents need to be able to save in assets whose value
does not fall when they are needed to compensate for a fall
in income. Such saving instruments are typically composed
of foreign assets, domestic financial assets, and domestic
real assets. To the extent that governments impose controls
on these asset markets, it impedes the ability of the poor
to use these savings instruments, and channels their savings
into less effective instruments.1 
 
Access to and structure of credit markets. Access
to credit markets is extremely limited for the poor to buffer
the effects of shocks, in part as a consequence of inadequate
borrower information available to credit institutions. The
structure of credit markets can also affect the poor indirectly:
Firms may find that access to credit is typically collateralized.
Therefore, shocks that drastically reduce the value of collateral
will also reduce firms’ access to credit, amplifying
the effect of shocks when firms become credit constrained.
Severe downturns may dramatically cut employment of the
poor and, hence, their welfare, especially since the poor
are usually employed by small firms that depend on collateralized
credit. 
 
Procyclical fiscal policy. During booms, some governments
have decreased export commodity taxes, reduced revenue collection
effort, or heavily increased expenditures, amplifying the
effects of positive shocks. These policies can make adjustment
more severe during busts, since the resulting expenditure
cuts following a negative shock have sometimes fallen on
social programs and transfers to the poor—just when
they are needed the most. Examples of these policies can
be traced back to the experience of Côte d’Ivoire
in 1976–79, and Colombia in 1975–1980. It has
also been argued that synchronizing tax policies with shocks
tends to obscure the information content of prices on which
agents make their saving decisions, leading in many cases
to lower saving rates than needed to buffer future adverse
shocks (Collier, Gunning, and associates 1999). 
 
Financial sector vulnerability and transmission to
other sectors. Shocks can also be amplified through
the banking system. For example, a negative terms of trade
shock can adversely affect bank liquidity by reducing demand
for domestic deposits, forcing banks to curtail credit roll-over,
spreading the shock throughout the economy (IADB, 1995,
and Hausmann, 1999). Similarly, if a sudden stop in capital
flows renders many nontradable goods producers bankrupt
because of big swings in relative prices, this may in turn
create financial turmoil as loans become nonperforming,
spreading the effect of the shock across the financial system
(Calvo, 1998). Bankruptcies in the nontradable sector may
translate into unemployment of the urban poor. 
 
Home 
 
What's New 
 
Site Map 
 
Site Index 
 
About the IMF 
 
Research 
 
Country Info 
 
News 
 
Videos 
 
Data and Statistics 
 
Publications 
 
Copyright and Usage 
 
Privacy Policy 
 
How to Contact Us 
 
عربي 
 
中文 
 
Français 
 
日本語 
 
Русский 
 
Español 
 
What's NewSite MapSite IndexContact UsGlossarySearchSearch IMFEntire SiteIMF Survey MagazineHomeAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublications 
 
What's NewSite MapSite IndexContact UsGlossarySearchSearch IMFEntire SiteIMF Survey Magazine 
 
HomeAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublications 
 
The IMF's Poverty Reduction and Growth FacilityA FactsheetMacroeconomic Policy and Poverty ReductionBrian AmesWard BrownShanta DevarajanAlejandro IzquierdoPrepared by the International Monetary Fund and the World BankAugust 20011. Introduction2. The Links Between Macroeconomic Policy
and Poverty Reduction: Growth MattersMacroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorComposition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterImplications for Macroeconomic Policy3. Macroeconomic Stability and Economic GrowthSources of InstabilityStabilizationElements of Macroeconomic Stability4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic Policies
and Poverty OutcomesFinancing Poverty Reduction StrategiesFiscal PolicyMonetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesPolicies to Insulate the Poor Against ShocksReferencesBoxes1. Definition and Measurement of Poverty2. Macroeconomic Stability3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic Policies4. Tax Policy5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission ChannelsTables1. Real GDP Growth2. GDP Deflator3. Primary SurplusFigures1. Financing Poverty Reduction Strategies in a Sustainable
Manner1. IntroductionPoverty is a multidimensional problem that goes beyond economics to include,
among other things, social, political, and cultural issues (see
Box 1). Therefore, solutions to poverty cannot be based exclusively
on economic policies, but require a comprehensive set of well-coordinated
measures. Indeed, this is the foundation for the rationale underlying
comprehensive poverty reduction strategies.1So why focus on macroeconomic issues? Because economic growth is the single
most important factor influencing poverty, and macroeconomic stability
is essential for high and sustainable rates of growth.2Hence, macroeconomic stability should be a key component of any poverty
reduction strategy.Macroeconomic stability by itself, however, does not ensure high rates
of economic growth. In most cases, sustained high rates of growth also
depend upon key structural measures, such as regulatory reform, privatization,
civil service reform, improved governance, trade liberalization, and banking
sector reform, many of which are discussed at length in thePoverty
Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, published by the World Bank.3Moreover, growth alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction. Growth
associated with progressive distributional changes will have a greater
impact on poverty than growth that leaves distribution unchanged. Hence,
policies that improve the distribution of income and assets within a society,
such as land tenure reform, pro-poor public expenditure, and measures
to increase the poor’s access to financial markets, will also form
essential elements of a country’s poverty reduction strategy.4Box 1. Definition and Measurement of PovertyThe World Bank’s 2000 World Development Report defines
poverty as an unacceptable deprivation in human well-being
that can comprise both physiological and social deprivation.
Physiological deprivation involves the non-fulfillment of
basic material or biological needs, including inadequate nutrition,
health, education, and shelter. A person can be considered
poor if he or she is unable to secure the goods and services
to meet these basic material needs. The concept of physiological
deprivation is thus closely related to, but can extend beyond,
low monetary income and consumption levels. Social deprivation
widens the concept of deprivation to include risk, vulnerability,
lack of autonomy, powerlessness, and lack of self-respect.
Given that countries’ definitions of deprivation often
go beyond physiological deprivation and sometimes give greater
weight to social deprivation, local populations (including
poor communities) should be engaged in the dialogue that leads
to the most appropriate definition of poverty in a country.To safeguard macroeconomic stability, the government budget, including
the country’s poverty reduction strategies, must be financed in a
sustainable, noninflationary manner. The formulation and integration of
a country’s macroeconomic policy and poverty reduction strategy are
iterative processes. Poverty reduction strategies need first to be articulated
(i.e., objectives and policies specified), then costed, and finally financed
within the overall budget in a noninflationary manner. The amount of finance,
much of which will be on concessional terms, is, however, not necessarily
fixed during this process: if credible poverty reduction strategies cannot
be financed from available resources, World Bank and IMF staff should
and will actively assist countries in their efforts to raise additional
financial support from the donor community. Nonetheless, in situations
where financing gaps remain, a country would have to revisit the intermediate
objectives of their strategy and reexamine their priorities. Except in
cases where macroeconomic imbalances are severe, there will usually be
some scope for flexibility in setting short-term macroeconomic targets.
However, the objective of macroeconomic stability should not be compromised.2. The Links Between Macroeconomic
Policy and Poverty Reduction: Growth MattersEconomic growth is thesingle most important factorinfluencing
poverty. Numerous statistical studies have found a strong association
between national per capita income and national poverty indicators, using
both income and nonincome measures of poverty.5One recent study consisting of 80 countries covering four decades found
that, on average, the income of the bottom one-fifth of the population
rose one-for-one with the overall growth of the economy as defined by
per capita GDP (Dollar and Kraay, 2000). Moreover, the study found that
the effect of growth on the income of the poor was on average no different
in poor countries than in rich countries, that the poverty–growth
relationship had not changed in recent years, and that policy-induced
growth was as good for the poor as it was for the overall population.
Another study that looked at 143 growth episodes also found that the “growth
effect” dominated, with the “distribution effect” being
important in only a minority of cases (White and Anderson, forthcoming).
These studies, however, establish association, but not causation. In fact,
the causality could well go the other way. In such cases, poverty reduction
could in fact be necessary to implement stable macroeconomic policies
or to achieve higher growth.Studies show that capital accumulation by the private sector drives growth.6Therefore, a key objective of a country’s poverty reduction strategy
should be to establish conditions that facilitate private sector investment.
No magic bullet can guarantee increased rates of private sector investment.
Instead, in addition to a sustainable and stable set of macroeconomic
policies, a country’s poverty reduction policy agenda should, in
most cases, extend across a variety of policy areas, including privatization,
trade liberalization, banking and financial sector reforms, labor markets,
the regulatory environment, and the judicial system. The agenda will certainly
include increased and more efficient public investment in a country’s
health, education, and other priority social service sectors.7Macroeconomic Stability Is Necessary for GrowthMacroeconomic stability is the cornerstone of any successful effort to
increase private sector development and economic growth (see
Box 2). Cross-country regressions using a large sample of countries
suggest that growth, investment, and productivity are positively correlated
with macroeconomic stability (Easterly and Kraay, 1999). Although it is
difficult to prove the direction of causation, these results confirm thatmacroeconomic instability has generally been associated with poor growth
performance. Without macroeconomic stability, domestic and foreign
investors will stay away and resources will be diverted elsewhere. In
fact, econometric evidence of investment behavior indicates that in addition
to conventional factors (i.e., past growth of economic activity, real
interest rates, and private sector credit), private investment is significantly
and negatively influenced by uncertainty and macroeconomic instability
(see, for example, Ramey and Ramey, 1995).Box 2. Macroeconomic StabilityMacroeconomic stability exists when key economic relationships
are in balance—for example, between domestic demand and
output, the balance of payments, fiscal revenues and expenditure,
and savings and investment. These relationships, however,
need not necessarily be in exact balance. Imbalances such
as fiscal and current account deficits or surpluses are perfectly
compatible with economic stability provided that they can
be financed in a sustainable manner.There is no unique set of thresholds for each macroeconomic
variable between stability and instability. Rather, there
is a continuum of various combinations of levels of key macroeconomic
variables (e.g., growth, inflation, fiscal deficit, current
account deficit, international reserves) that could indicate
macroeconomic instability. While it may be relatively easy
to identify a country in a state of macroeconomic instability
(e.g., large current account deficits financed by short-term
borrowing, high and rising levels of public debt, double-digit
inflation rates, and stagnant or declining GDP) or stability
(e.g., current account and fiscal balances consistent with
low and declining debt levels, inflation in the low single
digits, and rising per capita GDP), there is a substantial
“gray area” in between where countries enjoy a degree
of stability, but where macroeconomic performance could clearly
be improved.Finally, macroeconomic stability depends not only on the
macroeconomic management of an economy, but also on the structure
of key markets and sectors. To enhance macroeconomic stability,
countries need to support macroeconomic policy with structural
reforms that strengthen and improve the functioning of these
markets and sectors.Macroeconomic Instability Hurts the PoorIn addition to low (and sometimes even negative) growth rates, other
aspects of macroeconomic instability can place a heavy burden on the poor.
Inflation, for example, is a regressive and arbitrary tax, the burden
of which is typically borne disproportionately by those in lower income
brackets. The reason is twofold. First, the poor tend to hold most of
their financial assets in the form of cash rather than in interest-bearing
assets. Second, they are generally less able than are the better off to
protect the real value of their incomes and assets from inflation. In
consequence, price jumps generally erode the real wages and assets of
the poor more than those of the non-poor. Moreover, beyond certain thresholds,
inflation also curbs output growth, an effect that will impact even those
among the poor who infrequently use money for economic transactions.8In addition, low output growth that is typically associated with instability
can have a longer-term impact on poverty (a phenomenon known as “hysteresis”).
This phenomenon typically operates through shocks to the human capital
of the poor. In Africa, for instance, there is evidence that children
from poor families drop out of school during crises. Similarly, studies
for Latin American countries suggest that adverse terms-of-trade shocks
explain part of the decline of schooling attainment (see, for example,
Behrman, Duryea, and Szeleky, 1999).Composition and Distribution of Growth Also MatterAlthough economic growth is the engine of poverty reduction, it works
more effectively in some situations than in others.9Two key factors that appear to determine the impact of growth on poverty
are thedistributional patternsand thesectoral compositionof growth.If the benefits of growth are translated into poverty reduction through
the existing distribution of income, then more equal societies will bemore efficient transformers of growth into poverty reduction. A
number of empirical studies have found that the responsiveness of income
poverty to growth increases significantly as inequality is lowered.10This is also supported by a recent cross-country study that found that
the more equal the distribution of income in a country, the greater the
impact of growth on the number of people in poverty (Ravallion, 1997).
Others have suggested that greater equity comes at the expense of lower
growth and that there is a trade-off between growth and equity when it
comes to poverty reduction.11A large number
of recent empirical studies, however, have found that there is not necessarily
such a trade-off12and that equity in its
various dimensions is growth enhancing.13Thesectoral compositionof growth can determine the impact that
growth will have on poverty. Conventional wisdom has been that growth
in sectors of the economy where the poor are concentrated will have a
greater impact on reducing poverty than growth in other sectors—indeed,
this is almost a tautology. For example, it is often argued that in countries
where most of the poor live in rural areas, agricultural growth reduces
poverty because it generates income for poor farmers and increases the
demand for goods and services that can easily be produced by the poor.14Various country-specific and cross-country studies have shown that growth
in the agricultural and tertiary sectors has had a major effect on reducing
poverty, while growth in manufacturing has not.15This reinforces the case for duty-free access to industrial country markets
for agricultural exports from low-income countries. The links may be more
complex over the long run, however. While faster growth in agriculture
may address rural poverty in the short-term, reliance on agricultural
activity may also intensify output variability, which, in turn, would
contribute to increasing rather than decreasing poverty. A more diversified
economy with a vibrant manufacturing sector might offer the best chances
for a sustainable improvement in living standards in the long run.What are the implications of these empirical findings for macroeconomic
policy? First, in light of the importance of growth for poverty reduction,
and of macroeconomic stability for growth, the broad objective of macroeconomic
policy should be the establishment, or strengthening, of macroeconomic
stability. Policymakers should therefore define a set of attainable macroeconomic
targets (i.e., growth, inflation, external debt, and net international
reserves) with the objective of maintaining macroeconomic stability, and
pursue macroeconomic policies (fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate) consistent
with those targets. In cases where macroeconomic imbalances are less severe,
a range of possible targets may be consistent with the objective of stabilization.
Precise targets can then be set within that range, in accordance with
the goals and priorities in the country’s poverty reduction strategy
(see the section on fiscal policy later in this pamphlet).Second, most developing countries will likely have substantial scope
for enhancing the quality of growth, that is, the degree to which the
poor share in the fruits of such growth, through policies aimed at improving
income distribution. These policies (e.g., land tenure reform, changes
in marginal and average tax rates, increases in pro-poor social spending,
etc.) often are politically charged, and usually require supporting structural
and governance reforms that would empower the poor to demand resources
and/or ensure that resources intended for them are not diverted to other
groups of the population. As these topics pertain more broadly to political
economy, rather than exclusively to macroeconomics, they are beyond the
scope of this pamphlet. But they reinforce the point that economic growth
alone is not sufficient for poverty reduction and that complementary redistributional
policies may be needed to ensure that the poor benefit from growth.Finally, while issues regarding the composition of growth also go beyond
strict macroeconomics, several general policy observations can be made.
There is a general consensus that policies that introduce distortions
in order to influence growth in a particular sector can hamper overall
growth. The industrial policies pursued by many African developing countries
in the 1960s have long been discredited (World Bank, 1982). Instead, strategies
for sector specific growth should focus on removing distortions that impede
growth in a particular sector. In addition, policymakers should implement
policies that will empower the poor and create the conditions that would
permit them to move into new as well as existing areas of opportunity,
thereby allowing them to better share in the fruits of economic growth.
The objectives of such policies should include creating a stable environment
and level playing field conducive to private sector investment and broad-based
economic growth; removing the cultural, social, and economic constraints
that prevent the poor from making full use of their existing asset base
and accessing markets; and increasing the human capital base of the poor
through the provision of basic health and education services. Using these
policies, and the redistributive policies described above, policymakers
can target “pro-poor” growth—that is, they can attempt
to maximize the beneficial impact of sustained economic growth on poverty
reduction.3. Macroeconomic Stability
and Economic GrowthBroadly speaking, two considerations underlie macroeconomic policy recommendations.
First, there needs to be anassessment of the appropriate policystance to adopt in a given set of circumstances (i.e., should fiscal and/or
monetary policy be tightened or loosened?). Second, there is thechoice
of specific macroeconomic policy instrumentsthat would be beneficial
for a country to adopt (e.g., the use of a nominal anchor, a value-added
tax (VAT), etc.). In practice, these two considerations are closely linked.
Adjusting a policy stance is often done via the adoption of a new instrument
(or the modification of an existing one). More important, both considerations
are essential to efforts to enhance an economy’s stability.The specific stance must fit each country’s particular situation.
These situations can be put into three broad classes: (1) instability/disequilibrium;
(2) stabilization (e.g., transition from instability to stability); and
(3) stability/steady economic growth. This Section briefly discusses how
macroeconomic policies can contribute to stability. For countries that
enjoy stable macroeconomic conditions, there is somewhat greater flexibility
in the choice of appropriate stance for macroeconomic policy. The central
issue for these countries will be to ensure that the financing of their
poverty reduction strategies does not jeopardize macroeconomic stability,
which will be discussed in the last section of this pamphlet.Sources of InstabilityThere are two main sources of economic instability, namely exogenous
shocks and inappropriate policies. Exogenous shocks (e.g., terms of trade
shocks, natural disasters, reversals in capital flows, etc.) can throw
an economy into disequilibrium and require compensatory action. For example,
many low income countries have a narrow export base, often centered on
one or two key commodities. Shocks to the world price of these commodities
can therefore have a strong impact on the country’s income. Even
diversified economies, however, are routinely hit by exogenous shocks,
although, reflecting their greater diversification, shocks usually need
to be particularly large or long-lasting to destabilize such an economy.
Alternatively, a disequilibrium can be “self-induced” by poor
macroeconomic management. For example, an excessively loose fiscal stance
can increase aggregate demand for goods and services, which places pressure
on the country’s external balance of payments as well as on the domestic
price level. At times, economic crises are the result of both external
shocks and poor management.StabilizationIn most cases, addressing instability (i.e., stabilization) will require
policyadjustment; whereby a government introduces new measures
(possibly combined with new policy targets) in response to the change
in circumstances.16Adjustment will typically
be necessary if the source of instability is a permanent (i.e., systemic)
external shock or the result of earlier, inappropriate macroeconomic policies.
However, if the source of instability can be clearly identified as a temporary
shock (e.g., a one-time event) then it may be appropriate for a country
to accommodate it.17Identifying whether
a particular shock is temporary or is likely to persist is easier said
than done. Since there is often a considerable degree of uncertainty surrounding
such a judgment, it is usually wise to err somewhat on the side of caution
by assuming that the shock will largely persist and by basing the corresponding
policy response on the appropriate adjustment.In most circumstances where adjustment is necessary, both monetary (or
exchange rate) and fiscal instruments will have to be used. In particular,
successful adjustment to a permanent unfavorable shock that worsens the
balance of payments will often require a sustained tightening of the fiscal
stance, as this is the most immediate and effective way to increase domestic
savings and to reduce domestic demand—two objectives typically at
the center of stabilization programs.Adjustment policies may contribute to a temporary contraction of economic
activity, but this contingency should not be used to argue against implementing
adjustment policies altogether, as the alternative may be worse. Attempting
to sustain aggregate demand through unsustainable policies will almost
certainly aggravate the long-run cost of a shock, and could even fail
in the short run to the extent that it undermines confidence. In the long
run, greater benefits to the poor are to be had as a result of the restoration
of macroeconomic stability. The appropriate policies to protect the poor
during adjustment are to maintain, or even increase, social expenditures
and to adopt, where feasible, compensatory measures that would insulate
or offset temporary adverse impacts to the fullest extent possible.18This is best done by devoting resources to the establishment of effective
social safety nets,19as an enduring part
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy, rather than as a response
to crisis. Countries that lack such resources/safety nets could be forced
to either subject their poor to the short-term adverse effects of stabilization
or to delay the pace with which macroeconomic adjustment proceeds (and
put off the corresponding long-term benefits to economic growth and poverty
reduction).Countries in macroeconomic crisis typically have little choice but to
stabilize quickly, but for countries in the “gray” area of partial
stability, finding the right pace may prove difficult. In some cases,
a lack of financing will drive the pace of stabilization. Where financing
is not a constraint, however, policymakers will need to assess and carefully
weigh various factors on a case-by-case basis in choosing the most appropriate
pace of stabilization.Elements of Macroeconomic StabilityMacroeconomic policies influence and contribute to the attainment of
rapid, sustainable economic growth aimed at poverty reduction in a variety
of ways. By pursuing sound economic policies, policymakers send clear
signals to the private sector. The extent to which policymakers are able
to establish atrack record of policy implementationwill influence
private sector confidence, which will, in turn, impact upon investment,
economic growth, and poverty outcomes.Prudent macroeconomic policies can result inlow and stable inflation.
Inflation hurts the poor by lowering growth and by redistributing real
incomes and wealth to the detriment of those in society least able to
defend their economic interests. High inflation can also introduce high
volatility in relative prices and make investment a risky decision. Unless
inflation starts at very high levels, rapid disinflation can also have
short-run output costs, which need to be weighed against the costs of
continuing inflation.By moving towarddebt sustainability, policymakers will help create
the conditions for steady and continuous progress on growth and poverty
reduction by removing uncertainty as to whether a government will be able
to service new debt. By keeping domestic and external debt at levels that
can be serviced in a sustainable manner without unduly squeezing nondebt
expenditure, policymakers can also ensure that adequate domestic resources
are available to finance essential social programs.Inappropriate exchange rate policies distort the composition of growth
by influencing the price of tradable versus nontradable goods. Household
survey data for a number of countries indicate that the poor tend to consume
higher amounts of nontradable goods while generating relatively more of
their income from tradable goods (Sahn, Dorosh, and Younger, 1997). Hence,
in addition to distorting trade and inhibiting growth, an overly appreciated
exchange rate can impair the relative incomes and purchasing power of
the poor.By building and maintaining anadequate level of net international
reserves, a country can weather a temporary shock without having to
reduce essential pro-poor spending. External shocks can be particularly
detrimental to the poor because they can lower real wages, increase unemployment,
reduce nonlabor income, and limit private and net government transfers.
The level of “adequate” reserves depends on the choice of exchange
rate regime.4. Growth-Oriented Macroeconomic
Policies and Poverty OutcomesSince the emphasis of this pamphlet is on the role of macroeconomic policy
in supporting a country’s poverty reduction strategy, the discussion
of macroeconomic policies in this section focuses on countries that have
broadly achieved macroeconomic stability. Recent data indicate that many
developing countries are presently in a state of macroeconomic stability
(seeTables 1–3at the end of this pamphlet). When
formulating a country’s poverty reduction strategy, policymakers
will need to assess and determine what is the most appropriate combination
of key macroeconomic targets that would preserve macroeconomic stability
in their particular circumstance. Three key issues are discussed in this
section: (1) how to finance poverty-reducing spending in a way that doesn’t
endanger macroeconomic stability; (2) what specific policies can be adopted
to improve macroeconomic performance; and (3) policies to protect the
poor from domestic and external shocks.Financing Poverty Reduction StrategiesOnce a country has developed a comprehensive and fully costed draft of
its poverty reduction strategy, it will need to ensure that the strategy
can be pursued and financed in a manner that does not jeopardize its macroeconomic
stability and growth objectives.20To do
so, policymakers need to integrate their poverty reduction and macroeconomic
strategies into a consistent framework. The following paragraphs present
a conceptual framework that could be useful to policymakers in determining
whether their poverty reduction strategy is consistent with their macroeconomic
objectives.Given that it is difficult to determine beforehand what the growth target
should be, policymakers may wish to consider developing alternative macroeconomic
scenarios that take into consideration possible variations in the rate
of economic growth. Such scenarios could be usefully discussed with stakeholders
and development partners with a view to assessing the impact of lower-than-projected
economic growth on key macroeconomic targets and poverty outcomes and
to developing appropriate contingencies. The most likely or “base
case” scenario would then be used as the basis for carrying out an
initial attempt aimed at integrating the macroeconomic and poverty reduction
strategies into a consistent framework. Once this has been accomplished,
similar exercises could be carried out regarding the other contingency
scenarios for reference during the implementation stage of the strategy.Figure 1shows the various macroeconomic linkages
and constraints within a country and highlights the main trade-offs facing
policymakers. The starting point is theinitial articulation of the
country’s poverty reduction strategy, based on discussions with
representatives of the government, stakeholders, and development partners.
Ideally, these discussions will have resulted in the development of a
comprehensive action plan that identifies priority sectoral policies to
be pursued in support of poverty reduction, including in the areas of
education, health, and rural infrastructure. Given that poverty is multidimensional,
the action plan will also likely include priority measures with regard
to governance, structural reform, and other relevant areas, each of which
may have budgetary implications.The first step will be to provide afull costing of the envisaged
poverty reduction strategy. A comprehensive system for budget formulation
of poverty reduction strategies requires the development of Medium-Term
Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF), which currently exist in only a limited
number of countries (e.g., Ghana and Uganda). Details regarding how such
costing exercises can be carried out are presented in Chapter 5 of thePoverty Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, “Public Spending for
Poverty Reduction”.21The second step involves an assessment of the government’s spending
program with regard to priority spending, nondiscretionary spending, and
discretionary nonpriority spending. In doing so, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas and away from nonproductive, nonpriority spending, as well as from
areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist.The third step involves an assessment of domestic and external sources
of budget finance. This would include a review of (1) the existing tax
and nontax revenue base, in-cluding the effect of any changes in the tax
system envisaged under the poverty reduction strategy; (2) the scope for
financing public spending through net domestic borrowing in light of the
need to maintain macroeconomic stability and to ensure adequate availability
of credit to the private sector in support of private sector development
and economic growth; and (3) the scope for external financing (e.g., grants,
net external borrowing, and debt relief) that is realistic and sustainable
under the present circumstances.Once policymakers have carried out these assessments, they can then determine
whether the desired poverty reduction strategy can be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s growth and stability objectives. In
this regard, it is important to note that there are no rigid, pre-determined
limits regarding a country’s fiscal stance (such as, for example,
“the budget deficit must not be more than ‘x’ percent of
GDP”). Rather, arriving at an appropriate, integrated poverty reduction
and macroeconomic framework will require juggling a large number of parameters
and weighing the trade-offs between multiple objectives. The linkages
inFigure 1are meant to illustrate that this is an
iterative process. In this regard, quantitative frameworks that could
assist policymakers in assessing the distributional implications of their
macroeconomic policies would be particularly useful. Such frameworks,
however, are presently only at a nascent stage of development (seeBox
3).Box 3. Quantitative Frameworks for Assessing the Distributional
Impact of Macroeconomic PoliciesIn developing poverty reduction strategies, policymakers
would benefit from a quantitative framework that they could
use to assess the distributional impact of the macroeconomic
policy options under consideration. Such a framework would
be useful because the links between macroeconomic policies
and poverty are complex. A quantitative framework that identifies
the critical relationships on which the outcome depends could
therefore assist countries in assessing these trade-offs.What would be some of the desirable characteristics of such
a quantitative framework? First, the framework should be capable
of identifying some of the critical trade-offs in poverty-reducing
macroeconomic policies. For example, how do the costs (in
terms of poverty) of higher spending (and higher fiscal deficits)
compare with the benefits of targeting that spending on the
poor? Second, the framework should be consistent with economic
theory on the one hand, and with basic data availability,
such as national accounts and household income and expenditure
surveys, on the other. Otherwise, the frameworks will not
be able to foster a dialogue between conflicting parties on
these issues. Third, and most important, the framework should
be simple enough that government officials can use it on their
desktop computers. This means that it should not make undue
demands on data, and it should be based on readily available
software, such as Microsoft ExcelTM.World Bank staff is presently developing alternative quantitative
frameworks that could be used to evaluate some of the macroeconomic
aspects of poverty reduction strategies.1It is expected that
other possible quantitative frameworks will be developed over
time that could assist country teams in this regard.1See Agenor and others (2000). In developing
this particular framework, the authors opted for a modular
approach that allows different models to be incorporated as
alternative sub-components of the overall framework.If there remains an imbalance between spending and expected financing
that could jeopardize the country’s macroeconomic growth and stability
objective, one option would be to ascertain the extent to which additional
external financing may be available. But, as discussed earlier, policymakers
would need to assess the extent to which accommodating such expenditure
could place pressure on the price of nontraded goods and jeopardize stability.
Since the development of a poverty reduction strategy involves a participatory
process that includes the country’s development partners, the case
for additional donor support can be examined. To the extent possible,
donors should be encouraged to make medium-term aid commitments in support
of a country’s poverty reduction strategy so that the country can
have confidence as it begins new spending programs that these activities
can be sustained.22If the desired poverty reduction program cannot be financed in a manner
consistent with the country’s economic stability and growth objectives,
then policymakers will need to reconsider the parameters discussed above.
Key questions would include: Is there further scope for domestic revenue
mobilization? Can discretionary nonpriority spending be cut back more?
Is there scope for cutting back certain priority spending without undermining
the poverty reduction objective? Can the domestic financing target be
relaxed without jeopardizing macroeconomic stability or private sector
development objectives? Can the macroeconomic targets be modified in a
manner that would not undermine the interrelated objectives of rapid economic
growth, low and stable inflation, and poverty reduction? The answers to
these questions will determine the extent to which the desired poverty
reduction programs can be pursued in the current period.Fiscal PolicyFiscal policy can have a direct impact on the poor, both through the
government’s overall fiscal stance and through the distributional
implications of tax policy and public spending. Structural fiscal reforms
in budget and treasury management, public administration, governance,
transparency, and accountability can also benefit the poor in terms of
more efficient and better targeted use of public resources. As indicated
above, there is no rigid, pre-determined limit on what would be an appropriate
fiscal deficit. An assessment would need to be based on the particular
circumstances facing the country, its medium-term macroeconomic outlook,
and the scope for external budgetary assistance. The terms on which external
assistance is available are also important. There is a strong case, for
instance, for allowing higher grants to translate into higher spending
and deficits, to the extent that those grants can reasonably be expected
to continue in the future, and provided that the resources can be used
effectively.With regard to the composition of public expenditure, policymakers will
need to assess not only the appropriateness of the proposed poverty reduction
spending program, but also of planned nondiscretionary, and discretionary
nonpriority, spending. In so doing, they will need to take into particular
consideration the distributional and growth impact of spending in each
area and place due emphasis on spending programs that are pro-poor (e.g.,
certain programs in health, education, and infrastructure) and on the
efficient delivery of essential public services (e.g., public health,
public education, social welfare, etc.). In examining these expenditures,
policymakers should evaluate the extent to which government intervention
in general, and public spending in particular, can be justified on grounds
of market failure and/or redistribution.Policymakers must also ask themselves whether the envisaged public goods
or services can be delivered efficiently (e.g., targeted at the intended
beneficiaries) and, if not, whether appropriate mechanisms and/or incentives
can be put in place to ensure such efficient delivery. Countries should
begin by assessing in a frank manner their administrative capacity at
both the national and subnational levels to deliver well-targeted, essential
public services in support of poverty reduction. In this regard, policymakers
should consider the extent to which both technical assistance and the
private sector can play a role in improving the delivery of these services.In the context of medium-term budget planning, policymakers should consider
the scope for reallocating existing government spending into priority
areas23and away from nonproductive spending,
including areas where a rationale for public intervention does not exist.
Operation and maintenance expenditure tied to capital spending should
also be reviewed with a critical eye. The quality of public expenditure
could be assessed in the context of a public expenditure review with the
assistance of multilateral and/or bilateral donors. Policymakers could
then assess the new poverty reduction projects and activities that have
been identified in the context of the poverty reduction strategy and integrate
them into the preliminary spending program. In so doing, they should attempt
to rank the poverty programs in order of relative importance in line with
the country’s social and economic priorities, the market failure/redistribution
criteria identified above, and the country’s absorptive capacity
in the light of existing institutional and administrative constraints.
If spending cuts are deemed necessary in the context of the integrated
poverty reduction/macroeconomic framework, policymakers should refer back
to the ranking of the spending program based on the relative importance
and priority assigned to each activity.A key aspect of any poverty reduction strategy will be an assessment
of the impact of the present tax and nontax system on the poor. An important
medium-term objective for many developing countries will be to raise domestic
revenue levels with a view to providing additional revenue in support
of their poverty reduction strategies.24The existing revenue base should be reviewed relative to its capacity
to provide for the poverty spending requirements from nonbank domestic
financing. Revenues should be raised in as economically neutral a manner
as possible, while taking into consideration equity concerns and administrative
capacities (see Box 4).In a developing country , taking account of allocational effects means
that the tax system in particular should not attempt to affect savings
and investment—experience indicates that aggregate savings and investment
tend to be insensitive to taxes, with the result that the tax system typically
only affects the allocation of those aggregates across alternative forms.
As regards equity, the tax system should be assessed with respect to its
direct and indirect impact on the poor. It is difficult to have a tax
system that is both efficient and progressive, particularly in those countries
without a well-developed tax administration. Therefore, governments should
seek to determine a distribution of tax burdens seen as broadly fair rather
than use the tax system to achieve a drastic income redistribution.Box 4. Tax PolicyThe best tax systems typically include most or all of the
following elements:A broad-based consumption tax, such as a VAT, preferably
with a single rate, minimal exemptions, and a threshold
to exclude smaller enterprises from taxation. The VAT generally
should extend through the retail sector, and should apply
equally to domestic production and imported goods and services.
The VAT should cover agricultural products and inputs, subject
to the threshold, which will exclude small farmers.Excise taxesshould apply to petroleum products,
alcohol, and tobacco; should be collected at the point of
production or import; and should apply equally to domestic
production and imports.Taxes on international tradeshould play a minimal
role. Import tariffs should have a low average rate and
a limited dispersion of rates, to reduce arbitrary and excessive
rates of protection. Exemptions should be kept at a minimum
and nontariff barriers should be avoided altogether. Exporters
should have duties rebated on imported inputs used for producing
exports and export duties should generally be avoided.The personal income taxshould be characterized
by only a few brackets and a moderate top marginal rate,
by limited personal exemptions and deductions, by a standard
exemption that excludes persons with low incomes, and by
extensive use of final withholding.The corporate income taxshould be levied at one
moderate rate. Depreciation allowances should be uniform
across sectors, and there should be minimal use of tax incentives
other than permitting net operating losses to be carried
forward for some reasonable period of time.The use of a simplified regime for small businesses and the
informal sector may complement these major taxes. Real property
taxes may also be used if they can be administered appropriately,
though this may be difficult in developing countries.Tax policy should aim at moving toward a system of easily administered
taxes with broad bases and moderate marginal rates. To the extent that
some revenue provisions may be regressive, they should be offset through
the expenditure system (e.g., transitory, well-targeted food subsidies
could offset the impact of a broad-based consumption tax and cushion the
adverse impact of adjustment policies on the poor). Finally, where revenue
systems are being administered by a civil service that is highly constrained
in terms of human resources, technical support, and funding, countries
should rely heavily on final withholding, and keep to the absolute minimum
any exemptions, special provisions, or multiple rates.The scope for domestic budgetary financing will depend on a number of
factors, including the sustainable rate of monetary growth, the credit
requirements of the private sector, the relative productivity of public
investment, and the desired target for net international reserves. Sacrificing
low inflation (through faster monetary growth) to finance additional expenditure
is generally not an effective means to reduce poverty because the poor
are most vulnerable to price increases. At the same time, since private
sector development stands at the center of any poverty reduction strategy,
governments need to take into account the extent to which public sector
borrowing “crowds out” the private sector’s access to credit,
thereby undermining the country’s growth and inflation objectives.
At times, public sector borrowing can also “crowd in” private
sector investment by putting in place critical infrastructure necessary
for private enterprise to flourish. Given that at any point in time there
is a finite amount of credit available in an economy, policymakers must
therefore assess the relative productivity of public investment versus
private investment and determine the amount of domestic budgetary financing
that would be consistent with the need to maintain low inflation and support
sustainable economic growth.The amount and type of available external resources to finance the budget
will vary depending on the particular circumstances facing the country.
Countries that have access to external grants need to consider what amount
is available and sustainable under the present circumstances. The same
is true in the case of external debt, but policymakers also need to determine
whether the terms on such borrowing are appropriate and whether the added
debt burden is sustainable. To the extent that a country is benefiting
from, or may benefit from, external debt relief under the enhanced Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, net resource flows—flows
that are predictable over the medium term—will be freed up to finance
poverty-related budgetary expenditure. Domestic debt reduction could also
represent a viable use of additional concessional foreign assistance,
since it would both free up government resources to be directed at priority
poverty expenditure, as well as free up additional domestic credit for
use by the private sector.There may be a limit to the amount of additional external financing that
a country would deem to be appropriate, however. For example, there may
be absorptive capacity constraints that could drive up domestic wages
and prices, as well as appreciate the exchange rate and render the country’s
exports less competitive, thereby threatening both stability and growth.
The extent of such pressures will depend on how much of the additional
aid is spent on imports versus domestic nontraded goods and services.
There may also be uncertainty regarding aid flows, especially over the
medium term, as well as considerations regarding long-term dependency
on external official aid. In the absence of medium-term commitments of
aid, policymakers may therefore wish to be cautious in assuming what levels
of assistance would be forthcoming in the future.Monetary and Exchange Rate PoliciesMonetary and exchange rate policies can affect the poor primarily through
three channels: inflation, output, and the real exchange rate. As mentioned
above, inflation hurts the poor because it acts as a regressive tax and
curbs growth. Fluctuations in output clearly have a direct impact upon
the incomes of the poor, and monetary and exchange rate policies affect
these fluctuations in two ways: first, changes in the money supply can
have a short-run effect on real variables such as the real interest rate,25which in turn affect output; and second, a country’s chosen exchange
rate regime can buffer, or amplify, exogenous shocks. Finally, the real
exchange rate can affect the poor in two ways.26First, it influences a country’s external competitiveness and hence
its growth rate. Second, a change in the real exchange rate (through,
for example, a devaluation of the nominal rate) can have a direct impact
on the poor.27Given that monetary and exchange rate policies affect the poor through
their impact on inflation, output, and the real exchange rate, it might
seem, at first glance, that such policies should therefore be used to
target all three of these variables. However, although monetary and exchange
rate policies may affect the poor through all of these channels, the monetary
authorities cannot necessarily control the size and nature of the resulting
impact. For example, changes in the money supply may affect output and
employment in the short run, but they do so in a way that is at best uncertain
and imperfectly understood. As a result, monetary authorities are typically
unable to exploit this impact systematically. Similarly, monetary and
exchange rate policies are unable to manipulate the real exchange rate
beyond a short period of time. Therefore, actively using these policies
to pursue a particular short-run exchange rate goal, which may be inconsistent
with underlying economic fundamentals, could introduce instability.Monetary and exchange rate policies should target those variables over
which they have the most control, namely the long-run impact of inflation
on the rate of growth. Broadly speaking, this can be achieved by setting
one objective for monetary and exchange rate policies: the attainment
and maintenance of a low and stable rate of inflation. In practice this
means (1) choosing, and firmly committing to, an inflation rate target
within the context of the overall poverty reduction strategy and the associated
macroeconomic framework; (2) adopting the required policies to achieve
the target; and (3) not using monetary and exchange rate policies to pursue,
overtly or otherwise, additional or alternative objectives. Formulated
and implemented in this way, monetary and exchange rate policies can form
the basis for a stable macroeconomic environment.Improving Inflation PerformanceIn some cases, it may be desirable to target a lower rate of inflation.
What policies can help meet this objective? Ultimately, this question
has to be answered on a case-by-case basis. However, policymakers should
consider two general policies that are essential parts of any effort to
improve inflation performance: strong and sustained fiscal adjustment;
and the use of a nominal anchor and other measures (e.g., inflation targeting)
to enhance policy credibility.Fiscal AdjustmentA loose fiscal stance can put upward pressure on prices through two channels:
aggregate demand and financing. Such a fiscal stance increases the demand
for domestic goods, which, in the absence of a corresponding increase
in supply, puts upward pressure on their prices. It can also increase
demand for imports, putting downward pressure on the value of the domestic
currency and, hence, (in a flexible exchange rate regime) upward pressure
on the prices of imported goods. Further, if the fiscal stance is financed
by printing money, this expands the money supply and tends to increase
inflation.In theory, if inflationary pressures from the fiscal stance are being
transmitted exclusively through the financing channel, then inflationary
pressures could be reduced without fiscal adjustment if alternative (sustainable)
sources of financing, such as external financing, are available. In practice,
however, some fiscal adjustment is typically also necessary because either
the amount of alternative finance is insufficient and/or the fiscal stance
is also putting upward pressure on prices through the aggregate demand
channel. Indeed, evidence shows that successful disinflation episodes
have typically been accompanied by sizable and sustained fiscal adjustment
(Phillips, 1999). Therefore, countries that wish to target a significantly
lower rate of inflation need to ensure that the corresponding fiscal adjustment
is adequate.Credibility and Nominal AnchorsSetting policy targets is important. Consistently achieving those targets
is equally important. When targets under a policy are systematically missed,
the policy loses credibility. If a policy lacks credibility, the private
sector does not believe that the authorities are truly committed to their
policy targets, and hence does not fully factor the authorities’
targets into its inflation expectations, for instance when setting wage
bargains. This can result in an inflation bias—that is, higher inflation
outcomes brought on solely by the lack of policy credibility itself.Credibility can sometimes be enhanced by imposing restrictions on policy
(i.e., limiting the degree of discretion of the monetary authorities),
or by adopting specific institutional arrangements. For example, the adoption
of a fixed exchange rate regime involves a commitment to exchange domestic
currency for foreign currencies at a predefined rate. This imposes an
automatic discipline upon domestic monetary policy. In effect, control
over monetary policy is surrendered to the central bank of the country
whose currency has been chosen as the peg—typically a low inflation
country—which, in turn, imparts credibility to the domestic policy
objective of achieving low inflation.More generally, evidence shows that inflation performance has been better
in countries using a nominal anchor (Phillips, 1999). Using a nominal
anchor involves specifying and committing to a predetermined path for
a nominal variable—such as the exchange rate (i.e., the fixed exchange
rate discussed above is a nominal anchor) or a money aggregate—that
is to a certain degree under the control of the authorities.28If the variable threatens to deviate from its targeted path the authorities
take corrective action.29In this way,
inflation, and inflationary expectations, can be anchored.In some countries, fixed exchange rate regimes have clearly been
effective in establishing and maintaining low inflation. More generally,
there is empirical evidence that inflation performance has been better
in countries running fixed exchange rate regimes (see, for example, Ghosh
and others, 1999). However, the choice of a fixed exchange rate has to
be based on broader considerations than simply its merits as a nominal
anchor. In particular, the underlying structural features of an economy
need to be supportive of a fixed regime broadly speaking (for example,
the degree of price rigidity, the nature of its predominant exogenous
shocks, the degree of political support, etc.—these issues are discussed
below). Adopting a fixed exchange regime to serve only temporarily as
a nominal anchor can be risky. Exiting a fixed regime once inflation performance
is satisfactory can be difficult. Moreover, if a country’s economic
conditions are not supportive, or political support for the policy insufficient,
the peg could come under considerable pressure, which may, in the end,
force a costly abandonment of the regime and undermine the original objective
of stabilizing inflation.Both types of nominal anchors restrict the use of monetary instruments.30A standard critique has been that, although the use of a nominal anchor
may improve inflation performance, it comes at the cost of reducing the
discretion of the authorities to respond to short-run shocks. In practice
this trade-off may not be significant, however. Even if the monetary authorities
have full discretion,31as discussed above, their
ability to influence short-run output movements systematically is limited.
Moreover, their ability to exercise discretion is likely to be limited
by the need to preserve, or enhance, policy credibility.Inflation targeting has been adopted as the monetary regime in an
increasing number of industrialized and developing countries in recent
years. It is typically and preferably associated with a flexible exchange
rate system. Inflation targeting sets an inflation target for the central
bank and gives the responsibility for achieving the target to the central
bank. To enhance accountability, credibility, and efficiency, the central
bank in an inflation targeting regime is generally required to be extremely
transparent about its operations, explaining its decisions to the public,
publishing, in most cases, a regular inflation report.In the long run, however, only policies to which the authorities
are fully committed can be credible. Imposing restrictions on policy when
the necessary policy commitment is absent (or even when the private sector
erroneously suspects a lack of commitment) can have disastrous results.
For example, the private sector’s belief that a country’s authorities
are not committed to defending its fixed exchange rate may lead to a speculative
attack on the peg. Although devices may be used to accelerate the attainment
of a policy’s credibility, there is no substitute for commitment
to the policy, as demonstrated through sustained adherence to a prudent
macroeconomic stance.External Shocks and the Choice of Exchange Rate RegimeThe choice of exchange rate regime—fixed or flexible—depends
crucially on the nature of the economic shocks that affect the economy,
as well as the structural features of the economy, which may either mitigate
or amplify these shocks. Choosing a fixed exchange rate regime when these
underlying features of the economy are not supportive leaves a country
more exposed to the possibility of an external crisis, which can result
in the ultimate abandonment of the peg. In addition, shocks to output
can have a strong impact on the poor. Since different exchange rate regimes
have different insulating properties vis-à-vis certain types of
shocks, choosing the regime that best insulates the economy will serve
to moderate fluctuations in output, and thereby best serve the poor.For example, if the predominant source of disturbance to an economy is
shocks to the terms of trade, a flexible exchange rate regime may be best
because the nominal exchange rate is free to adjust in response to the
shock and bring the real exchange rate to its new equilibrium (see, for
example, Devarajan and Rodrik, 1992). Alternatively, if domestic monetary
shocks predominate, such as shocks to the demand for money, output may
be best insulated by a fixed exchange rate that allows these shocks to
be absorbed by fluctuations in international reserves. Of course, one
of the challenges facing the policymaker is to identify which shocks are
in fact predominant in a particular economy.The structural features of the economy may also affect the impact a particular
shock has on the economy, as well as the insulating properties of exchange
rate regimes. For example, if an economy is characterized by a significant
degree of nominal wage rigidity, wages will not fully adjust (at least
in the short run) in response to small real shocks, and hence the effect
of those shocks on output will be amplified. In these circumstances, even
if domestic monetary shocks are important, a flexible exchange rate regime
may well be preferable (in contrast to the conclusions above). Another
important structural feature is the degree of an economy’s openness.
Typically the more open an economy is, the greater is its exposure to
external shocks. This would argue generally in favor of a flexible exchange
rate regime. However, if an open economy is sufficiently diversified (i.e.,
it trades a wide range of goods and services) and if its prices are sufficiently
flexible, then a fixed exchange rate may be preferable because the volatility
of flexible exchange rates may impede international trade, and thus lower
external demand (although the evidence on this is mixed). In conclusion,
these various pros and cons of fixed versus flexible exchange rate regimes
need to be carefully assessed and weighed on a case-by-case basis—again,
there is no universal “right answer.”Policies to Insulate the Poor Against ShocksGiven that the poor are adversely affected by macroeconomic shocks, what
should governments do about it? The question can be divided into two parts:
How should economic policy be designed to cushion the impact of shocks
on the poor, in particular during times of crisis and/or adjustment? What
specific policies can governments undertake to insulate the poor from
the consequences of shocks by removing existing distortive policies?Social Safety NetsSound macroeconomic policies will help a country to reduce its exposure
to macroeconomic shocks, but there is no cost-effective policy that will
insure againstallpossible shocks. It is therefore crucial to
havesocial safety netsin place to ensure that poor households
are able to maintain minimum consumption levels and access to basic social
services during periods of crisis. Social safety net measures are also
necessary to protect the poor from shocks imposed on them during periods
of economic reform and adjustment.32Safety
nets include public work programs, limited food subsidies, transfers to
compensate for income loss, social funds, fee waivers, and scholarships
for essential services such as education and health. The specific mix
of measures will depend on the particular characteristics of the poor
and their vulnerability to shocks and should be well-targeted and designed
in most cases to provide temporary support.Equally important, the resources allocated to social safety nets should
be protected during economic crises and/or adjustment, when fiscal tightening
may be necessary. Governments should have budgetary guidelines approved
by their legislatures that prioritize and protect poverty-related programs
during periods of crisis and provide a clear course of action that ensures
access of the poor to basic social services during periods of austerity
(see Lustig, forthcoming). As will be discussed below, countercyclical
fiscal policies can also ensure the availability of funds for financing
safety nets during crises.Another important factor to consider is that safety nets should already
be operating before economies get hit by shocks so that they can be effective
in times of distress (for a more detailed account, see World Bank, 2000).
However, if a shock occurs before appropriate safety nets have been developed,
then “second-best” social protection policies may be necessary.
For instance, food subsidies have been found to be inefficient and often
benefiting the non-poor, and most reform programs call for their reduction
or even elimination. However, after a severe shock such as the 1997–98
East Asian financial crisis, when countries like Indonesia lacked comprehensive
safety nets, existing food subsidies were probably the only means of preventing
widespread malnutrition and starvation. In the context of a country’s
reform process, however, these subsidies should be replaced with better
targeted and less distorting transfers to the poor.Removing Market Distortions and Distortive PoliciesIn addition to pursuing favorable economic policies and putting in place
appropriate social safety nets, there are specific structural reforms
that governments can undertake to insulate the poor from the adverse consequences
of shocks. Most of these have to do with addressing the mechanisms through
which macroeconomic shocks are transmitted to the poor. (see
Box 5).To the extent that asset market distortions prevent the poor from saving
and insulating themselves against shocks, policies to remove these distortions
can be valuable.33For instance, foreign
exchange controls can force the poor to hold their assets in domestic
currency, whose value typically declines with adverse shocks. Relaxing
these controls in a well-managed fashion could give the poor access to
safer assets, such as foreign currency, that could protect them from devaluations,
a typical outcome following negative shocks.34Similarly, severe financial repression, such as controlled interest rates,
can impede the poor’s ability to save.35If properly managed, financial liberalization policies can therefore have
the additional benefit of increasing self-insurance for the poor.Box 5. How Shocks Harm the Poor: Transmission ChannelsCredit markets, as well as safe asset markets for appropriate
saving, are major instruments for coping with income volatility.
Distortions in these markets curtail the ability of the poor
to follow consumption smoothing patterns. Government behavior
in response to shocks is also a major determinant of the effects
of these shocks on the poor. Financial sector behavior can
also amplify the effects of shocks.Distortions in asset markets. To self-insure against
shocks, agents need to be able to save in assets whose value
does not fall when they are needed to compensate for a fall
in income. Such saving instruments are typically composed
of foreign assets, domestic financial assets, and domestic
real assets. To the extent that governments impose controls
on these asset markets, it impedes the ability of the poor
to use these savings instruments, and channels their savings
into less effective instruments.1Access to and structure of credit markets. Access
to credit markets is extremely limited for the poor to buffer
the effects of shocks, in part as a consequence of inadequate
borrower information available to credit institutions. The
structure of credit markets can also affect the poor indirectly:
Firms may find that access to credit is typically collateralized.
Therefore, shocks that drastically reduce the value of collateral
will also reduce firms’ access to credit, amplifying
the effect of shocks when firms become credit constrained.
Severe downturns may dramatically cut employment of the
poor and, hence, their welfare, especially since the poor
are usually employed by small firms that depend on collateralized
credit.Procyclical fiscal policy. During booms, some governments
have decreased export commodity taxes, reduced revenue collection
effort, or heavily increased expenditures, amplifying the
effects of positive shocks. These policies can make adjustment
more severe during busts, since the resulting expenditure
cuts following a negative shock have sometimes fallen on
social programs and transfers to the poor—just when
they are needed the most. Examples of these policies can
be traced back to the experience of Côte d’Ivoire
in 1976–79, and Colombia in 1975–1980. It has
also been argued that synchronizing tax policies with shocks
tends to obscure the information content of prices on which
agents make their saving decisions, leading in many cases
to lower saving rates than needed to buffer future adverse
shocks (Collier, Gunning, and associates 1999).Financial sector vulnerability and transmission to
other sectors. Shocks can also be amplified through
the banking system. For example, a negative terms of trade
shock can adversely affect bank liquidity by reducing demand
for domestic deposits, forcing banks to curtail credit roll-over,
spreading the shock throughout the economy (IADB, 1995,
and Hausmann, 1999). Similarly, if a sudden stop in capital
flows renders many nontradable goods producers bankrupt
because of big swings in relative prices, this may in turn
create financial turmoil as loans become nonperforming,
spreading the effect of the shock across the financial system
(Calvo, 1998). Bankruptcies in the nontradable sector may
translate into unemployment of the urban poor.1For example,
in Ethiopia, livestock prices (often the poor’s only
asset) fall during a drought because all farmers are selling
their cattle to compensate for the bad harvest.Policies that increase borrower information and relax barriers to access
to credit markets can help the poor reduce consumption volatility, since
credit availability makes them less dependent on current income. Also,
to the extent that collateralized credit allocation amplifies the effects
of negative shocks by reducing small- and medium-sized firms’ access
to credit when asset prices fall (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1977, and Izquierdo,
1999), policies promoting better financial-sector credit allocation mechanisms
based on project profitability and borrower information could reduce the
incidence of this particular transmission channel and its indirect effects
on the poor (i.e., lower employment opportunities).36Finally, and most important, governments can do a lot to reduce the pro-cyclical
nature of their fiscal policies by saving rather than spending windfalls
following positive shocks and ideally using those savings as a buffer
for expenditures against negative shocks. A cautious approach would be
for the government to “treat every favorable shock as temporary and
every adverse one as permanent,” although judgment would also depend
on, among other things, the availability of financing (Little, and others,
1993). However, even this rule of thumb may not be enough. Governments
need to find ways of “tying their hands” to resist the pressure
to spend windfall revenues (Devarajan, 1999). For example, when the source
of revenue is publicly owned, such as oil or other natural resource, it
may be appropriate to save the windfall revenues abroad, with strict rules
on how much of it can be repatriated. Countries such as Colombia, Chile,
and Botswana have tried variants of this strategy, with benefits not just
for overall macroeconomic management, but also for protecting the poor
during adverse shocks, since saved funds during good times can be applied
to financing of safety nets during crisis.1There has been an emerging
consensus on how to make actions at the country level, and the support
of development partners, more effective in bringing about sustainable
poverty reduction. This consensus indicates a need for poverty reduction
strategies that are country-driven, with broad participation of civil
society, elected officials, key donors, and relevant international finance
institutions; outcome-oriented; and developed from an understanding of
the nature and determinants of poverty. Under the new framework, the country-led
strategy would be presented in a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP),
which is expected to become a key instrument for a country’s relations
with the donor community.2Macroeconomic stability is
a situation where key economic relationships are broadly in balance and
sustainable.3The sourcebook is available
at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.4These points are reflected
in the design of programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF), which are derived from a country’s own poverty
reduction strategy. The strategy itself should be based upon fully integrated
macroeconomic, structural, and social policies. SeeKey Features of
IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs,
August 16, 2000, available at http://www.imf.org/external/ np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.5Examples include the relationship
between infant mortality rates and per capita income, the ratio of female
to male literacy and per capita income, and average consumption and the
incidence of income poverty. In all three cases, national poverty indicators
improved as per capita income rose. See the discussion in the World Bank’sWorld Development Report, 2000.6Devarajan, Swaroop, and Zou
(1997) and Devarajan, Easterly, and Pack (forthcoming).7There is little empirical
evidence, however, that public sector capital expenditure has a positive
impact on growth, reflecting the tendency for such investment in the past
to be wasteful or inefficient. This does not mean public investment is
unimportant—only that efficiency considerations must be central in any
public investment program. See Easterly and Rebelo (1993), Devarajan,
Swaroop, and Zou (1997).8Empirical evidence confirms
a strong negative relationship between inflation and economic growth at
all but the lowest levels of inflation. See Fischer (1993), Bruno and
Easterly (1998), Ghosh and Phillips (1998), and Sarel (1996).9For any given increment in
per capita income, the impact on poverty will depend on how that increment
is distributed across the population. While growth is almost always accompanied
by a reduction in income poverty, and negative growth is accompanied by
an increase in poverty, for any given growth rate the impact on poverty
can vary substantially.10Ravallion (1997), Datt and
Ravallion (1992), and Kakwani (1993).11To the extent that people
with high income save a larger proportion of their income than do those
with low income, policies that redistribute income in favor of the lower-income
population may impede savings and, to the extent that such savings are
channeled into productive investment, long-term growth.12This refers to developing
economies, where often income (and wealth) inequality is particularly
acute. In general, there is likely to be a point beyond which greater
equity is incompatible with adequate labor and enterprise incentives,
which, in turn, would be detrimental to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik
(1994); Bénabou (1996); Birdsall and Londoño (1997); Deninger and Squire
(1998); Perotti (1992, 1993, and 1996); and Persson and Tabellini (1994).13By increasing the human
capital of the poor, redistributive policies can increase the productivity
of the workforce, thereby enhancing growth. Others have argued that there
is also a political economy channel as well—in countries with greater
income equality there is greater political support for public policies
that are more conducive to growth. See Alesina and Rodrik (1994), and
Persson and Tabellini (1994). For empirical support for this effect, see
Deininger (1999); Thomas and Wang (1998); Klasen (1999); and Dollar and
Gatti (1999). For dissenting views, see Forbes (2000) and Li, Xie, and
Zou (1999).14It is also often argued
that if growth results in the expansion of low-skilled employment, then
the poor are more likely to be the beneficiaries of the growth. One recent
cross-country study (Fallon and Hon, 1999) found that the more labor-intensive
the growth pattern, the faster the decline in the incidence of poverty.15Datt and Ravallion (1998),
Thorbecke and Jung (1996), Timmer (1997), and Bourguignon and Morrisson
(1998).16In certain cases, the return
to a steady growth state may also require structural reform and measures
to improve the functioning of markets.17Broadly speaking, this means
leaving the underlying stance of macroeconomic policy unchanged (or, in
some cases, the stance may be adjusted temporarily to mitigate the impact
of the shock) and adjusting policy targets in a way that takes into account
the impact of the shock. However, if such a policy stance cannot be financed
in a noninflationary way, then some adjustment will also be necessary.18Indeed, a key feature of
programs supported by the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) is to assess the distributional impact of key macroeconomic policies
and to put in place countervailing measures needed to protect the poor.
SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
Supported Programs, August 16, 2000 at http://www.imf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/eng/key.htm.19Social safety nets are designed
to mitigate possible adverse effects of reform measures on the poor. These
instruments include temporary arrangements, as well as existing social
protection measures reformed and adapted for this purpose, such as limited
food subsidies, social security arrangements for dealing with various
life cycle and other contingencies, and targeted public works. See Chu
and Gupta (1998).20Even if the strategy can
be fully financed with concessional resources, policymakers will need
to assess the degree to which poverty-reducing spending may place pressure
on the price of nontraded goods and thereby threaten stability.21TheSourcebookcan
be found at http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/ strategies/sourctoc.htm.22Ensuring there is appropriate
flexibility in fiscal targets and supporting authorities’ efforts to secure
commitments of higher donor flows when warranted are key features of the
IMF’s PRGF-supported programs. SeeKey Features of IMF Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility (PRGF) Supported Programs, August 16, 2000, at
http://www.inf.org/external/np/prgf/2000/ eng/key.htm.23"Priority areas" are defined
as those activities identified as crucial for poverty reduction.24For a discussion of tax
policy and developing countries, see Tanzi and Zee (2000).25The real interest rate represents
the real cost of borrowing—that is, the cost in terms of goods—and is
approximately equal to the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate
of inflation.26The real exchange rate represents
the relative price of a basket of goods in two countries. It is commonly
measured by multiplying the nominal exchange rate by the ratio of consumer
price indices in the two countries. If the real exchange rate appreciates,
the basket of goods becomes more expensive in the home country. This can
happen if either the home currency appreciates, or if the home country’s
prices rise relative to those of the foreign country.27For example, as indicated
earlier, recent studies have shown that in some countries, the income
of the poor is more associated with tradable goods and consumption with
nontradable goods than the income and consumption patterns of other income
groups. In these countries, this implies that a depreciation or devaluation
of the domestic currency would make the country’s exports more attractive
and stimulate demand for tradable goods. Since the poor’s incomes are
tied to the production and export of tradables, this would, in turn, increase
their income while the cost of their consumption of nontradables would
remain unchanged.28Other nominal variables
can also serve as anchors. What is essential is that the variable targeted
be nominal, and not real, since real variables cannot provide an anchor
for nominal prices. For example, countries that have targeted the real
exchange rate have generally had worse inflation performance than other
countries. See Phillips (1999).29The two most commonly used
nominal anchors are a fixed exchange rate and a money aggregate (such
as reserve money or broad money). Under a fixed exchange rate regime,
whenever the market rate threatens to depart from the predetermined rate,
the monetary authorities buy or sell foreign exchange for the domestic
currency to ensure that the exchange rate remains fixed. Similarly, under
a monetary anchor the monetary authorities specify a predetermined path
for a monetary aggregate, and tighten or loosen the monetary stance when
the aggregate threatens to depart from that path.30Under a fixed exchange rate,
the monetary authorities give up control of the money supply. Under a
monetary anchor, the authorities cannot pursue an exchange rate target.31If there are no explicit
policy targets, the monetary authorities have full discretion. This differs
from the concept of independence of the monetary authorities.32Reform programs should be
designed with the poor and vulnerable in mind. The mix and sequencing
of reform measures should be designed to minimize the hardships brought
about by the program. The appropriate mix and sequencing cannot, however,
ensure that the adverse effects will be removed entirely and, hence, social
safety nets are needed to mitigate possible short-run adverse effects
on the poor. In some cases, it may be appropriate to delay reforms until
adequate safety net measures can be put in place. See Chu and Gupta (1998).33Contrary to what some may
believe, the poor do save, to smooth consumption over time, as well as
to guard against adverse shocks. For a recent analysis, see Deaton and
Paxson (2000).34Also, capital controls that
drive a wedge between domestic and world real interest rates make it possible
to extract an inflation tax, which especially hurts the poor.35For many countries, domestic
asset holdings of the poor are mainly composed of currency, so it would
seem that this channel is not relevant. But this may just reflect that
low controlled interest rates provide a disincentive to save in bank deposits.
Removing financial distortions could shift the allocation of domestic
assets in favor of deposits and, to the extent that market interest rates
account for expected inflation, insulate the poor’s savings from inflation.36Collateralization may be
initially the only way for small firms to gain access to credit markets,
but its amplification effects should not be understated. Instead, policies
that reduce informational problems (i.e., the reason for collateralization)
should be implemented.The following three tables show macroeconomic data, such as GDP growth,
for a range of developing countries. The tables reveal that many developing
countries are in a state of macroeconomic stability.Table 1. Real GDP Growth(Annual percentage change)1994199519961997199819991994-99AverageHigh-growth countriesMozambique7.54.37.111.312.09.08.5Sudan4.025.24.06.75.04.08.2Vietnam8.89.59.38.15.84.27.6Uganda6.411.59.14.75.67.87.5Bhutan8.16.85.57.87.17.07.1India7.98.07.35.06.16.26.8Togo16.86.89.74.3–1.03.06.6Myanmar7.56.96.45.75.0...6.3Lao PDR8.27.06.87.04.04.06.2Angola1.411.311.76.65.0–0.16.0Eritrea9.82.96.87.93.93.05.7Armenia5.46.95.93.37.25.55.7Ethiopia3.56.110.95.9–1.07.05.4Côte d’Ivoire2.07.06.95.94.54.35.1Benin4.44.65.55.74.55.05.0Bangladesh3.85.55.05.35.14.34.8Senegal2.94.75.25.05.75.14.8Rwanda–50.234.415.812.89.55.94.7Nicaragua3.34.34.75.14.06.34.6Nepal8.23.55.35.02.33.44.6Burkina Faso1.24.06.04.76.25.24.6Malawi–10.215.49.04.93.14.54.5Chad10.21.03.74.18.1–1.04.4Guinea4.04.44.64.84.43.74.3Mali0.96.23.26.83.35.34.3Mauritania4.64.65.53.23.24.34.2Ghana3.34.04.64.24.74.44.2Cambodia4.07.67.01.01.04.54.2Niger4.02.63.43.38.32.34.0Lesotho3.44.510.08.0–5.02.53.9Zimbabwe6.8–0.58.73.72.51.23.7Pakistan3.95.15.01.23.33.93.7Yemen, Rep. of–3.67.92.98.14.82.23.7Central African Republic4.97.2–4.05.24.73.43.6Mongolia2.36.32.44.03.52.73.5Cameroon–2.53.35.05.15.04.43.4Tanzania1.42.64.34.03.54.33.4Georgia–11.42.410.511.02.92.02.9Gambia, The0.20.92.24.94.74.22.9Kenya2.64.44.12.11.81.62.8Madagascar0.01.72.13.73.94.72.7Indonesia7.58.27.84.7–13.20.22.5Nigeria0.12.54.32.71.81.02.1Solomon Islands5.27.03.5–0.5–7.04.02.0São Tomé and Príncipe2.22.01.51.02.52.52.0Low-growth countriesCongo, Rep. of–5.54.06.3–2.43.6–0.70.9Haiti–8.34.42.71.43.1...0.7Zambia–3.4–2.36.53.4–2.01.30.6Uzbekistan–5.2–0.91.72.54.4...0.5Guinea-Bissau3.24.44.65.4–28.18.7–0.3Kyrgyz Republic–20.1–5.47.19.91.8...–1.3Congo, Dem. Rep. of–3.90.7–0.9–5.73.0...–1.4Comoros–5.3–3.9–0.40.00.01.0–1.4Azerbaijan–24.3–11.81.35.810.010.0–1.5Burundi–3.9–7.3–8.40.44.8–1.0–2.6Sierra Leone3.5–26.628.7–17.6–0.8–8.1–3.5Tajikistan–19.0–11.8–4.42.38.2...–4.9Turkmenistan–17.3–7.2–6.7–11.35.0...–7.5Ukraine–22.9–12.2–10.0–3.0–1.7–2.0–8.6Moldova–31.2–1.4–7.81.3–8.6–5.0–8.8Afghanistan........................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of........................Liberia........................Somalia........................Source: Country authoritiesTable 2. GDP Deflator(Annual percentage change)1994199519961997199819991994-99AverageLow-inflation countriesGambia, The3.84.02.95.01.35.23.7Guinea2.95.52.82.45.04.03.8Bangladesh3.46.73.81.05.38.94.9Comoros9.48.02.33.53.03.04.9Ethiopia2.612.71.03.29.71.95.2Mauritania6.44.44.65.59.91.95.5Cameroon11.017.05.42.71.1–1.26.0Uganda6.89.44.63.910.73.06.4Central African Republic22.810.31.80.81.71.36.5Senegal27.85.90.92.32.21.66.8Nepal7.46.37.87.33.39.26.9India9.78.67.95.68.95.57.7Lesotho7.58.98.68.08.47.28.1Burkina Faso27.89.84.22.23.11.68.1Niger32.75.44.73.13.03.08.7Eritrea22.211.32.92.72.712.69.1Cambodia8.99.17.19.217.05.79.5Bhutan9.39.811.414.75.97.89.8Mali27.918.45.41.04.02.29.8Solomon Islands11.57.112.18.112.0…10.2Pakistan12.913.88.413.37.85.510.3Côte d’Ivoire41.79.62.73.23.12.710.5Nicaragua7.810.911.69.212.913.911.1Togo33.812.25.111.42.71.111.1Vietnam14.519.56.112.18.95.811.2Benin33.515.46.74.74.23.511.3Chad43.48.611.62.74.1–2.111.4Congo, Rep. of36.822.6–3.07.5–19.124.111.5Burundi6.715.319.023.312.10.612.8Kenya35.211.28.715.510.65.014.4Rwanda18.051.310.515.62.6–2.415.9High-inflation countriesTanzania28.228.922.318.519.311.621.50Indonesia7.89.98.712.673.117.221.6Madagascar41.645.217.87.38.49.821.7Haiti35.631.021.216.312.7…23.4Nigeria27.856.036.91.421.611.925.9Sierra Leone20.163.73.016.827.025.025.9Myanmar22.119.423.032.934.0…26.3Yemen, Rep. of33.254.839.612.9–9.326.826.3Ghana30.143.239.819.517.011.526.9Guinea-Bissau23.244.748.635.57.63.127.1Mozambique59.452.040.911.13.85.228.7Mongolia66.642.533.524.411.52.830.2Zambia56.636.924.325.923.225.632.1Malawi26.290.340.413.523.246.440.0Lao PDR7.719.713.917.784.0125.444.7Kyrgyz Republic180.942.035.319.38.5…57.2São Tomé and Príncipe73.574.550.8100.237.116.058.7Sudan80.841.1107.464.928.9…64.6Moldova278.138.730.512.98.037.367.6Tajikistan236.2285.0397.9100.249.9…213.8Ukraine953.5415.566.218.113.2…293.3Azerbaijan1,428.6545.726.49.2–8.34.8334.4Uzbekistan1,238.6370.981.670.533.2…359.0Turkmenistan1,022.1705.71,174.361.613.5…595.4Armenia4,107.3161.219.617.711.21.1719.7Georgia9,349.2162.740.27.03.415.01,596.3Angola2,170.71,886.15,421.893.660.9412.61,674.3Congo, Dem. Rep. of26,762.4466.4613.1187.315.0…5,608.8Afghanistan........................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of........................Liberia........................Somalia........................Source: Country authoritiesTable 3. Primary Surplus1(As a percentage of GDP)199419951996199719981994-98AverageSurplus/low deficit countriesMauritania2.46.511.48.28.47.4Kenya8.37.36.26.25.86.8Lesotho8.16.36.52.1–4.53.7Congo, Rep.–1.15.97.04.42.23.7Cameroon–2.23.25.05.44.13.1Zambia5.23.82.13.50.13.0Côte d’Ivoire1.43.23.83.02.62.8São Tomé and Príncipe……–0.311.3–2.82.7Nigeria0.58.17.53.3–6.92.5Senegal1.62.72.12.21.72.1Tanzania0.6–0.51.24.72.21.6Zimbabwe0.0–0.70.7–0.48.01.5Benin0.8–0.52.12.03.31.5Bhutan–0.50.12.0;–2.13.00.5Myanmar0.00.00.00.00.00.0Indonesia1.11.41.1–0.5–3.30.0Vietnam…–0.6–0.2–0.8–1.6–0.8Gambia, The2.6–2.9–5.3–1.42.9–0.8Madagascar–3.0–1.1–0.20.7–1.8–1.1Uganda–2.3–1.9–0.9–0.90.4–1.1Niger–4.5–1.51.4–1.1–0.4–1.2Mali–2.0–1.70.2–1.1–1.6–1.2Guinea–2.0–1.3–1.7–1.3–1.8–1.6Burkina Faso–1.8–2.20.3–2.3–2.1–1.6Mozambique–4.2–1.6–1.5–1.3–1.4–2.0Ethiopia–4.3–1.4–3.20.7–2.1–2.1Malawi–16.21.02.3–5.27.0–2.2Central African Republic–7.6–2.8–1.5–0.90.6–2.5Ghana–4.4–2.1–4.4–2.70.1–2.7Rwanda–7.00.0–4.1–1.3–1.9–2.9Togo–6.2–3.0–3.00.2–3.0–3.0High deficit countriesChad–3.5–3.4–4.0–2.9–4.1–3.6Solomon Islands–5.5–5.3–4.4–4.90.1–4.0Burundi–2.8–3.1–8.3–3.4–2.7–4.1Bangladesh–4.6–5.3–4.4–4.3–4.2–4.5Haiti–1.8–8.3–7.6–3.1–4.0–5.0Sierra Leone–4.5–7.8–4.4–5.0–5.1–5.4Pakistan–6.0–5.9–7.0–6.4–5.5–6.2Lao PDR…–4.5–5.9–8.1–7.2–6.4Nepal–7.0–6.6–7.5–7.3–7.8–7.2Angola–8.1–16.51.1……–7.8India–8.8–7.9–7.8–8.5–9.4–8.5Nicaragua–11.4–11.0–10.2–7.6–5.0–9.0Mongolia–22.8–4.1–8.2–8.6–11.3–11.0Eritrea...............–27.3–27.3Afghanistan.....................Cambodia.....................Comoros.....................Congo, Dem. Rep. of.....................Guinea-Bissau.....................Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of.....................Liberia.....................Somalia.....................Sudan.....................Source: Data provided by the authorities.1Negative sign indicates a primary deficit.ReferencesAgenor, Pierre-Richard, Shantayanan Devarajan, William Easterly, Hippolyte
Fofack, Delfin Go, Alejandro Izquierdo, Lodovico Pizzati, 2000, “A
Macroeconomic Framework for Poverty Reduction Strategies,” Development
Research Group and World Bank Institute (unpublished; Washington: World
Bank).Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1994, “Distributive Politics
and Economic Growth,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
109 (May), pp. 465–90.Balassa, Bela, 1981, “The Newly Industrializing Developing Countries
after the Oil Crisis,”WeltwirtschaftlichesArchiv, Vol. 117,
No.1, pp. 142–94.Behrman, Jere, Suzanne Duryea, and Miguel Szeleky, 1999, “Schooling
Investments and Macroeconomic Conditions: A Micro-Macro Investigation
for Latin America and the Caribbean” (unpublished; Washington: Inter-American
Development Bank).Bénabou, Roland, 1996, “Inequality and Growth,” inNBER
Macroeconomics Annual: Volume II, ed. by Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).Birdsall, Nancy, and Juan Luis Londoño, 1997, “Asset Inequality
Matters: An Assessment of the World Bank’s Approach to Poverty Reduction,”American Economic Review, Vol. 87(May), pp. 32–37.Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson, 1998, “Inequality
and Development: The Role of Dualism,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 57 (December), pp. 233–57.Bourguignon, François, William H. Branson, and Jaime de Melo,
1989,Macroeconomic Adjustment and Income Distribution: A Macro- Micro
Simulation Model(Paris: OECD Development Centre).Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly, 1998, “Inflation Crises and
Long-Run Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 41(February),
pp. 3–26.Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises:
The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”Journal of Applied Economics,
Vol. 1 (November), pp. 35–54.Chu, Ke-young, and Sanjeev Gupta, eds., 1998,Social Safety Nets:
Issues and Recent Experiences(Washington: International Monetary
Fund).Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning, 1999, “Explaining African
Economic Performance,”Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
37 (March), pp. 64–111.———, and associates, 1999,Trade Shocks in Developing
Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press).Datt, Gaurav, and Martin Ravallion, 1992, “Growth and Redistribution
Components of Changes in Poverty Measures: A Decomposition with Applications
to Brazil and India in the 1980s,”Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 38 (April), pp. 275–95.———, 1998, “Farm Productivity and Rural Poverty in
India,”Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 34 (April), pp.
62–85.Deaton, A., and C. Paxson, 2000, “Growth and Saving Among Individuals
and Households,”Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
82 (May), pp. 212–25.Deininger, Klaus, 1999, “Asset Distribution, Inequality, and Growth,”
Development Research Group (Washington: World Bank).________, and Lyn Squire, 1998, “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues:
Inequality and Growth,”Journal of Development EconomicsVol.
57 (December), pp. 259–87.Devarajan, Shantayanan, 1999, “Cameroon,” inTrade Shocks
in Developing Countries, ed. by Paul Collier and Jan Gunning (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).________, William R. Easterly, and Howard Pack, forthcoming “Is
Investment in Africa Too Low or Too High?”,Journal of African
Economies.Devarajan, Shantayanan, and Dani Rodrik, 1992, “Do the Benefits
of Fixed Exchange Rates Outweigh Their Costs? The CFA Zone in Africa,”
inOpen Economies: Structural Adjustment and Agriculture, ed. by
Ian Goldin and L. Alan Winters (Cambridge, New York, and Melbourne: Cambridge
University Press).Dollar, David, and Roberta Gatti, 1999, “Gender Inequality, Income
and Growth: Are Good Times Good for Women?” Policy Research Report
on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 1. (Washington: World
Bank).Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, 2000, “Growth Is Good for the Poor,”
World Bank Development Research Group (unpublished; Washington, D.C.,
World Bank).Easterly, William, and Aart Kraay, 1999, “Small States, Small Problems?”
Policy Research Working Paper No. 2139, Development Research Group (Washington:
World Bank).Easterly, William, and Sergio Rebelo, 1993, “Fiscal Policy and Economic
Growth: An Empirical Investigation,”Journal of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 32 (December), pp. 417–58.Fallon, Peter, and Vivian Hon, 1999, “Poverty and Labor-Intensive
Growth.” Note prepared forWorld Development Report 2000/2001(unpublished; Washington: World Bank).Fischer, Stanley, 1993, “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,”Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 32 (December), pp. 485–512.Forbes, Kristin, 2000, “A Reassessment of the Relationship Between
Inequality and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 90
(September), pp. 869–887.Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan Ostry, and Holger Wolf, 1999,
“Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?” (unpublished;
Washington: International Monetary Fund).Ghosh, Atish, and Steven Phillips, 1998, “Warning: Inflation May
Be Harmful to Your Growth,”IMF Staff Papers, International
Monetary Fund, Vol. 45 (December), pp. 672–710.Hausmann, Ricardo, 1999, “Managing Terms of Trade Volatility,”
World Bank PREM Note No. 18, February (Washington: World Bank).Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 1995 “Overcoming Volatility,”
Economic and Social Progress in Latin America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press).Izquierdo, Alejandro, 1999, “Credit Constraints and the Asymmetric
Behavior of Asset Prices and Output under External Shocks,” (Doctoral
Dissertation, University of Maryland).Kakwani, Nanak, 1993, “Poverty and Economic Growth with Application
to Côte d’Ivoire,”Review of Income and Wealth,
Vol. 39 (June) pp. 121–139.Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105 (April), pp. 211–48.Klasen, Stephan, 1999, “Does Gender Inequality Reduce Growth and
Development? Evidence from Cross-Country Regressions,” Policy Research
Report on Gender and Development Working Paper Series No. 7. (Washington:
World Bank).Li, Hongyi, Danyang Xie, Heng-fu Zou, 1999. “Dynamics of Income
Distribution,” Development Research Group, (unpublished; Washington:
World Bank).Little, I., R. Cooper, W. M. Corden, and S. Rajapatirana, 1993, Boom,
Crisis and Adjustment:The Macroeconomic Experience of Developing Countries(Oxford: Oxford University Press).Lustig, Nora, forthcoming. “Crises and the Poor: Socially Responsible
Macroeconomics.” Economia, Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic Association.Malmberg Calvo, Christina, 1998, Options for Managing and Financing Rural
Transport Infrastructure, World Bank Technical Paper No. 411 (Washington:
World Bank).Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastano, and Sunil Sharma, 1997, “The Scope
for Inflation Targeting in Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper
No. 97/130 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).Mitra, Pradeep, 1994,Adjustment in Oil-Importing Developing Countries(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).Perotti, Roberto, 1992, “Income Distribution: Politics and Growth,”American Economic Review, Vol. 82 (May), pp. 311–16.———, 1993, “Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution,
and Growth.”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60 (October),
pp 755–76.———, 1996, “Redistribution and Non-consumption Smoothing
in an Open Economy,”Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 63 (July),
pp 411–33.Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1994, “Is Inequality Harmful
for Growth?”American Economic Review, Vol. 84 (June), pp.
600–21.Phillips, Steven, 1999, “Inflation: The Case for a More Resolute
Approach” inEconomic Adjustment and Reform in Low-Income Countries:
Studies by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund,”ed.
by Hugh Bredenkamp and Susan Schadler (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey, 1995, “Cross-Country Evidence
on the Link between Volatility and Growth,”American Economic
Review, Vol. 85 (December), pp. 1138–51.Ravallion, Martin, 1997, “Can High-Inequality Developing Countries
Escape Absolute Poverty?” Policy Research Working Paper No. 1775
(Washington: World Bank).Sahn, David, Paul Dorosh, and Stephen Younger, 1997,Structural Adjustment
Reconsidered: Economic Policy and Poverty in Africa, (New York: Cambridge
University Press).Sarel, Michael, 1996, “Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Economic
Growth,”Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 43
(March), pp. 199–215.Tanzi, Vito, and Howell Zee, 2000, “Tax Policy for Emerging Markets:
Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper No. 00/35 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).Thomas, Vinod, and Yan Wang, 1998, “Missing Lessons of East Asia:
Openness, Education, and the Environment,” Latin America and Caribbean
Studies: Proceedings series (Washington: World Bank).Thorbecke, Erik, and Hong-Sang Jung, 1996, “A Multiplier Decomposition
Method to Analyze Poverty Alleviation,”Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 48 (March), pp. 279–300.Timmer, C. Peter, 1997, “How Well Do the Poor Connect to the Growth
Process?” Consulting Assistance on Economic Reform Discussion Paper
No. 178. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Institute for International Development).White, Howard, and Edward Anderson, forthcoming, “Growth Versus
Distribution: Does the Pattern of Growth Matter?”, Institute of Development
Studies, University of Sussex.World Bank, 1982,Accelerated Development in Sub-Saharan Africa(Washington: World Bank).World Bank, 2000,World Development Report(New York and Washington:
Oxford University Press and World Bank).HomeWhat's NewSite MapSite IndexAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublicationsCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyHow to Contact Usعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
Table 1. Real GDP Growth(Annual percentage change) 
 
1994 
 
1995 
 
1996 
 
1997 
 
1998 
 
1999 
 
1994-99Average 
 
7.5 
 
4.3 
 
7.1 
 
11.3 
 
12.0 
 
9.0 
 
8.5 
 
4.0 
 
25.2 
 
4.0 
 
6.7 
 
5.0 
 
4.0 
 
8.2 
 
8.8 
 
9.5 
 
9.3 
 
8.1 
 
5.8 
 
4.2 
 
7.6 
 
6.4 
 
11.5 
 
9.1 
 
4.7 
 
5.6 
 
7.8 
 
7.5 
 
8.1 
 
6.8 
 
5.5 
 
7.8 
 
7.1 
 
7.0 
 
7.1 
 
7.9 
 
8.0 
 
7.3 
 
5.0 
 
6.1 
 
6.2 
 
6.8 
 
16.8 
 
6.8 
 
9.7 
 
4.3 
 
–1.0 
 
3.0 
 
6.6 
 
7.5 
 
6.9 
 
6.4 
 
5.7 
 
5.0 
 
... 
 
6.3 
 
8.2 
 
7.0 
 
6.8 
 
7.0 
 
4.0 
 
4.0 
 
6.2 
 
1.4 
 
11.3 
 
11.7 
 
6.6 
 
5.0 
 
–0.1 
 
6.0 
 
9.8 
 
2.9 
 
6.8 
 
7.9 
 
3.9 
 
3.0 
 
5.7 
 
5.4 
 
6.9 
 
5.9 
 
3.3 
 
7.2 
 
5.5 
 
5.7 
 
3.5 
 
6.1 
 
10.9 
 
5.9 
 
–1.0 
 
7.0 
 
5.4 
 
2.0 
 
7.0 
 
6.9 
 
5.9 
 
4.5 
 
4.3 
 
5.1 
 
4.4 
 
4.6 
 
5.5 
 
5.7 
 
4.5 
 
5.0 
 
5.0 
 
3.8 
 
5.5 
 
5.0 
 
5.3 
 
5.1 
 
4.3 
 
4.8 
 
2.9 
 
4.7 
 
5.2 
 
5.0 
 
5.7 
 
5.1 
 
4.8 
 
–50.2 
 
34.4 
 
15.8 
 
12.8 
 
9.5 
 
5.9 
 
4.7 
 
3.3 
 
4.3 
 
4.7 
 
5.1 
 
4.0 
 
6.3 
 
4.6 
 
8.2 
 
3.5 
 
5.3 
 
5.0 
 
2.3 
 
3.4 
 
4.6 
 
1.2 
 
4.0 
 
6.0 
 
4.7 
 
6.2 
 
5.2 
 
4.6 
 
–10.2 
 
15.4 
 
9.0 
 
4.9 
 
3.1 
 
4.5 
 
4.5 
 
10.2 
 
1.0 
 
3.7 
 
4.1 
 
8.1 
 
–1.0 
 
4.4 
 
4.0 
 
4.4 
 
4.6 
 
4.8 
 
4.4 
 
3.7 
 
4.3 
 
0.9 
 
6.2 
 
3.2 
 
6.8 
 
3.3 
 
5.3 
 
4.3 
 
4.6 
 
4.6 
 
5.5 
 
3.2 
 
3.2 
 
4.3 
 
4.2 
 
3.3 
 
4.0 
 
4.6 
 
4.2 
 
4.7 
 
4.4 
 
4.2 
 
4.0 
 
7.6 
 
7.0 
 
1.0 
 
1.0 
 
4.5 
 
4.2 
 
4.0 
 
2.6 
 
3.4 
 
3.3 
 
8.3 
 
2.3 
 
4.0 
 
3.4 
 
4.5 
 
10.0 
 
8.0 
 
–5.0 
 
2.5 
 
3.9 
 
6.8 
 
–0.5 
 
8.7 
 
3.7 
 
2.5 
 
1.2 
 
3.7 
 
3.9 
 
5.1 
 
5.0 
 
1.2 
 
3.3 
 
3.9 
 
3.7 
 
–3.6 
 
7.9 
 
2.9 
 
8.1 
 
4.8 
 
2.2 
 
3.7 
 
4.9 
 
7.2 
 
–4.0 
 
5.2 
 
4.7 
 
3.4 
 
3.6 
 
2.3 
 
6.3 
 
2.4 
 
4.0 
 
3.5 
 
2.7 
 
3.5 
 
–2.5 
 
3.3 
 
5.0 
 
5.1 
 
5.0 
 
4.4 
 
3.4 
 
1.4 
 
2.6 
 
4.3 
 
4.0 
 
3.5 
 
4.3 
 
3.4 
 
–11.4 
 
2.4 
 
10.5 
 
11.0 
 
2.9 
 
2.0 
 
2.9 
 
0.2 
 
0.9 
 
2.2 
 
4.9 
 
4.7 
 
4.2 
 
2.9 
 
2.6 
 
4.4 
 
4.1 
 
2.1 
 
1.8 
 
1.6 
 
2.8 
 
0.0 
 
1.7 
 
2.1 
 
3.7 
 
3.9 
 
4.7 
 
2.7 
 
7.5 
 
8.2 
 
7.8 
 
4.7 
 
–13.2 
 
0.2 
 
2.5 
 
0.1 
 
2.5 
 
4.3 
 
2.7 
 
1.8 
 
1.0 
 
2.1 
 
5.2 
 
7.0 
 
3.5 
 
–0.5 
 
–7.0 
 
4.0 
 
2.0 
 
2.2 
 
2.0 
 
1.5 
 
1.0 
 
2.5 
 
2.5 
 
2.0 
 
–5.5 
 
4.0 
 
6.3 
 
–2.4 
 
3.6 
 
–0.7 
 
0.9 
 
–8.3 
 
4.4 
 
2.7 
 
1.4 
 
3.1 
 
... 
 
0.7 
 
–3.4 
 
–2.3 
 
6.5 
 
3.4 
 
–2.0 
 
1.3 
 
0.6 
 
–5.2 
 
–0.9 
 
1.7 
 
2.5 
 
4.4 
 
... 
 
0.5 
 
3.2 
 
4.4 
 
4.6 
 
5.4 
 
–28.1 
 
8.7 
 
–0.3 
 
–20.1 
 
–5.4 
 
7.1 
 
9.9 
 
1.8 
 
... 
 
–1.3 
 
–3.9 
 
0.7 
 
–0.9 
 
–5.7 
 
3.0 
 
... 
 
–1.4 
 
–5.3 
 
–3.9 
 
–0.4 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
1.0 
 
–1.4 
 
–24.3 
 
–11.8 
 
1.3 
 
5.8 
 
10.0 
 
10.0 
 
–1.5 
 
–3.9 
 
–7.3 
 
–8.4 
 
0.4 
 
4.8 
 
–1.0 
 
–2.6 
 
3.5 
 
–26.6 
 
28.7 
 
–17.6 
 
–0.8 
 
–8.1 
 
–3.5 
 
–19.0 
 
–11.8 
 
–4.4 
 
2.3 
 
8.2 
 
... 
 
–4.9 
 
–17.3 
 
–7.2 
 
–6.7 
 
–11.3 
 
5.0 
 
... 
 
–7.5 
 
–22.9 
 
–12.2 
 
–10.0 
 
–3.0 
 
–1.7 
 
–2.0 
 
–8.6 
 
–31.2 
 
–1.4 
 
–7.8 
 
1.3 
 
–8.6 
 
–5.0 
 
–8.8 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
Table 2. GDP Deflator(Annual percentage change) 
 
1994 
 
1995 
 
1996 
 
1997 
 
1998 
 
1999 
 
1994-99Average 
 
3.8 
 
4.0 
 
2.9 
 
5.0 
 
1.3 
 
5.2 
 
3.7 
 
2.9 
 
5.5 
 
2.8 
 
2.4 
 
5.0 
 
4.0 
 
3.8 
 
3.4 
 
6.7 
 
3.8 
 
1.0 
 
5.3 
 
8.9 
 
4.9 
 
9.4 
 
8.0 
 
2.3 
 
3.5 
 
3.0 
 
3.0 
 
4.9 
 
2.6 
 
12.7 
 
1.0 
 
3.2 
 
9.7 
 
1.9 
 
5.2 
 
6.4 
 
4.4 
 
4.6 
 
5.5 
 
9.9 
 
1.9 
 
5.5 
 
11.0 
 
17.0 
 
5.4 
 
2.7 
 
1.1 
 
–1.2 
 
6.0 
 
6.8 
 
9.4 
 
4.6 
 
3.9 
 
10.7 
 
3.0 
 
6.4 
 
22.8 
 
10.3 
 
1.8 
 
0.8 
 
1.7 
 
1.3 
 
6.5 
 
27.8 
 
5.9 
 
0.9 
 
2.3 
 
2.2 
 
1.6 
 
6.8 
 
7.4 
 
6.3 
 
7.8 
 
7.3 
 
3.3 
 
9.2 
 
6.9 
 
9.7 
 
8.6 
 
7.9 
 
5.6 
 
8.9 
 
5.5 
 
7.7 
 
7.5 
 
8.9 
 
8.6 
 
8.0 
 
8.4 
 
7.2 
 
8.1 
 
27.8 
 
9.8 
 
4.2 
 
2.2 
 
3.1 
 
1.6 
 
8.1 
 
32.7 
 
5.4 
 
4.7 
 
3.1 
 
3.0 
 
3.0 
 
8.7 
 
22.2 
 
11.3 
 
2.9 
 
2.7 
 
2.7 
 
12.6 
 
9.1 
 
8.9 
 
9.1 
 
7.1 
 
9.2 
 
17.0 
 
5.7 
 
9.5 
 
9.3 
 
9.8 
 
11.4 
 
14.7 
 
5.9 
 
7.8 
 
9.8 
 
27.9 
 
18.4 
 
5.4 
 
1.0 
 
4.0 
 
2.2 
 
9.8 
 
11.5 
 
7.1 
 
12.1 
 
8.1 
 
12.0 
 
… 
 
10.2 
 
12.9 
 
13.8 
 
8.4 
 
13.3 
 
7.8 
 
5.5 
 
10.3 
 
41.7 
 
9.6 
 
2.7 
 
3.2 
 
3.1 
 
2.7 
 
10.5 
 
7.8 
 
10.9 
 
11.6 
 
9.2 
 
12.9 
 
13.9 
 
11.1 
 
33.8 
 
12.2 
 
5.1 
 
11.4 
 
2.7 
 
1.1 
 
11.1 
 
14.5 
 
19.5 
 
6.1 
 
12.1 
 
8.9 
 
5.8 
 
11.2 
 
33.5 
 
15.4 
 
6.7 
 
4.7 
 
4.2 
 
3.5 
 
11.3 
 
43.4 
 
8.6 
 
11.6 
 
2.7 
 
4.1 
 
–2.1 
 
11.4 
 
36.8 
 
22.6 
 
–3.0 
 
7.5 
 
–19.1 
 
24.1 
 
11.5 
 
6.7 
 
15.3 
 
19.0 
 
23.3 
 
12.1 
 
0.6 
 
12.8 
 
35.2 
 
11.2 
 
8.7 
 
15.5 
 
10.6 
 
5.0 
 
14.4 
 
18.0 
 
51.3 
 
10.5 
 
15.6 
 
2.6 
 
–2.4 
 
15.9 
 
28.2 
 
28.9 
 
22.3 
 
18.5 
 
19.3 
 
11.6 
 
21.50 
 
7.8 
 
9.9 
 
8.7 
 
12.6 
 
73.1 
 
17.2 
 
21.6 
 
41.6 
 
45.2 
 
17.8 
 
7.3 
 
8.4 
 
9.8 
 
21.7 
 
35.6 
 
31.0 
 
21.2 
 
16.3 
 
12.7 
 
… 
 
23.4 
 
27.8 
 
56.0 
 
36.9 
 
1.4 
 
21.6 
 
11.9 
 
25.9 
 
20.1 
 
63.7 
 
3.0 
 
16.8 
 
27.0 
 
25.0 
 
25.9 
 
22.1 
 
19.4 
 
23.0 
 
32.9 
 
34.0 
 
… 
 
26.3 
 
33.2 
 
54.8 
 
39.6 
 
12.9 
 
–9.3 
 
26.8 
 
26.3 
 
30.1 
 
43.2 
 
39.8 
 
19.5 
 
17.0 
 
11.5 
 
26.9 
 
23.2 
 
44.7 
 
48.6 
 
35.5 
 
7.6 
 
3.1 
 
27.1 
 
59.4 
 
52.0 
 
40.9 
 
11.1 
 
3.8 
 
5.2 
 
28.7 
 
66.6 
 
42.5 
 
33.5 
 
24.4 
 
11.5 
 
2.8 
 
30.2 
 
56.6 
 
36.9 
 
24.3 
 
25.9 
 
23.2 
 
25.6 
 
32.1 
 
26.2 
 
90.3 
 
40.4 
 
13.5 
 
23.2 
 
46.4 
 
40.0 
 
7.7 
 
19.7 
 
13.9 
 
17.7 
 
84.0 
 
125.4 
 
44.7 
 
180.9 
 
42.0 
 
35.3 
 
19.3 
 
8.5 
 
… 
 
57.2 
 
73.5 
 
74.5 
 
50.8 
 
100.2 
 
37.1 
 
16.0 
 
58.7 
 
80.8 
 
41.1 
 
107.4 
 
64.9 
 
28.9 
 
… 
 
64.6 
 
278.1 
 
38.7 
 
30.5 
 
12.9 
 
8.0 
 
37.3 
 
67.6 
 
236.2 
 
285.0 
 
397.9 
 
100.2 
 
49.9 
 
… 
 
213.8 
 
953.5 
 
415.5 
 
66.2 
 
18.1 
 
13.2 
 
… 
 
293.3 
 
1,428.6 
 
545.7 
 
26.4 
 
9.2 
 
–8.3 
 
4.8 
 
334.4 
 
1,238.6 
 
370.9 
 
81.6 
 
70.5 
 
33.2 
 
… 
 
359.0 
 
1,022.1 
 
705.7 
 
1,174.3 
 
61.6 
 
13.5 
 
… 
 
595.4 
 
4,107.3 
 
161.2 
 
19.6 
 
17.7 
 
11.2 
 
1.1 
 
719.7 
 
9,349.2 
 
162.7 
 
40.2 
 
7.0 
 
3.4 
 
15.0 
 
1,596.3 
 
2,170.7 
 
1,886.1 
 
5,421.8 
 
93.6 
 
60.9 
 
412.6 
 
1,674.3 
 
26,762.4 
 
466.4 
 
613.1 
 
187.3 
 
15.0 
 
… 
 
5,608.8 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
Table 3. Primary Surplus1(As a percentage of GDP) 
 
1994 
 
1995 
 
1996 
 
1997 
 
1998 
 
1994-98Average 
 
2.4 
 
6.5 
 
11.4 
 
8.2 
 
8.4 
 
7.4 
 
8.3 
 
7.3 
 
6.2 
 
6.2 
 
5.8 
 
6.8 
 
8.1 
 
6.3 
 
6.5 
 
2.1 
 
–4.5 
 
3.7 
 
–1.1 
 
5.9 
 
7.0 
 
4.4 
 
2.2 
 
3.7 
 
–2.2 
 
3.2 
 
5.0 
 
5.4 
 
4.1 
 
3.1 
 
5.2 
 
3.8 
 
2.1 
 
3.5 
 
0.1 
 
3.0 
 
1.4 
 
3.2 
 
3.8 
 
3.0 
 
2.6 
 
2.8 
 
… 
 
… 
 
–0.3 
 
11.3 
 
–2.8 
 
2.7 
 
0.5 
 
8.1 
 
7.5 
 
3.3 
 
–6.9 
 
2.5 
 
1.6 
 
2.7 
 
2.1 
 
2.2 
 
1.7 
 
2.1 
 
0.6 
 
–0.5 
 
1.2 
 
4.7 
 
2.2 
 
1.6 
 
0.0 
 
–0.7 
 
0.7 
 
–0.4 
 
8.0 
 
1.5 
 
0.8 
 
–0.5 
 
2.1 
 
2.0 
 
3.3 
 
1.5 
 
–0.5 
 
0.1 
 
2.0; 
 
–2.1 
 
3.0 
 
0.5 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
1.1 
 
1.4 
 
1.1 
 
–0.5 
 
–3.3 
 
0.0 
 
… 
 
–0.6 
 
–0.2 
 
–0.8 
 
–1.6 
 
–0.8 
 
2.6 
 
–2.9 
 
–5.3 
 
–1.4 
 
2.9 
 
–0.8 
 
–3.0 
 
–1.1 
 
–0.2 
 
0.7 
 
–1.8 
 
–1.1 
 
–2.3 
 
–1.9 
 
–0.9 
 
–0.9 
 
0.4 
 
–1.1 
 
–4.5 
 
–1.5 
 
1.4 
 
–1.1 
 
–0.4 
 
–1.2 
 
–2.0 
 
–1.7 
 
0.2 
 
–1.1 
 
–1.6 
 
–1.2 
 
–2.0 
 
–1.3 
 
–1.7 
 
–1.3 
 
–1.8 
 
–1.6 
 
–1.8 
 
–2.2 
 
0.3 
 
–2.3 
 
–2.1 
 
–1.6 
 
–4.2 
 
–1.6 
 
–1.5 
 
–1.3 
 
–1.4 
 
–2.0 
 
–4.3 
 
–1.4 
 
–3.2 
 
0.7 
 
–2.1 
 
–2.1 
 
–16.2 
 
1.0 
 
2.3 
 
–5.2 
 
7.0 
 
–2.2 
 
–7.6 
 
–2.8 
 
–1.5 
 
–0.9 
 
0.6 
 
–2.5 
 
–4.4 
 
–2.1 
 
–4.4 
 
–2.7 
 
0.1 
 
–2.7 
 
–7.0 
 
0.0 
 
–4.1 
 
–1.3 
 
–1.9 
 
–2.9 
 
–6.2 
 
–3.0 
 
–3.0 
 
0.2 
 
–3.0 
 
–3.0 
 
–3.5 
 
–3.4 
 
–4.0 
 
–2.9 
 
–4.1 
 
–3.6 
 
–5.5 
 
–5.3 
 
–4.4 
 
–4.9 
 
0.1 
 
–4.0 
 
–2.8 
 
–3.1 
 
–8.3 
 
–3.4 
 
–2.7 
 
–4.1 
 
–4.6 
 
–5.3 
 
–4.4 
 
–4.3 
 
–4.2 
 
–4.5 
 
–1.8 
 
–8.3 
 
–7.6 
 
–3.1 
 
–4.0 
 
–5.0 
 
–4.5 
 
–7.8 
 
–4.4 
 
–5.0 
 
–5.1 
 
–5.4 
 
–6.0 
 
–5.9 
 
–7.0 
 
–6.4 
 
–5.5 
 
–6.2 
 
… 
 
–4.5 
 
–5.9 
 
–8.1 
 
–7.2 
 
–6.4 
 
–7.0 
 
–6.6 
 
–7.5 
 
–7.3 
 
–7.8 
 
–7.2 
 
–8.1 
 
–16.5 
 
1.1 
 
… 
 
… 
 
–7.8 
 
–8.8 
 
–7.9 
 
–7.8 
 
–8.5 
 
–9.4 
 
–8.5 
 
–11.4 
 
–11.0 
 
–10.2 
 
–7.6 
 
–5.0 
 
–9.0 
 
–22.8 
 
–4.1 
 
–8.2 
 
–8.6 
 
–11.3 
 
–11.0 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
–27.3 
 
–27.3 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
...... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
... 
 
HomeWhat's NewSite MapSite IndexAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublicationsCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyHow to Contact Usعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
HomeWhat's NewSite MapSite IndexAbout the IMFResearchCountry InfoNewsVideosData and StatisticsPublicationsCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyHow to Contact Usعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
