ESG Investing: Practices, Progress 
and Challenges

   1 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESG Investing: Practices, Progress  
and Challenges  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBE  
 
 

2    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Please cite this report  as: 
Boffo, R., and R. Patalano (2020), “ESG Investing: Practices, Progress and Challenges”, OECD Paris, 
www.oecd.org/finance/ESG -Investing -Practices -Progress -and-Challenges.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This work is published under the responsibility of the Secretary -General of the OECD. The opinions expressed and 
arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of OECD member countries. This document, 
as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, 
to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.  
 
 
© OECD 2020  
   3 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Foreword  
Forms of sustainable finance have grown rapidly in recent years, as a growing number of institutional 
investors and funds incorporate various Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) investing 
approaches. While the mainstreaming of forms of sustain able finance is a welcome development, the 
terminology and practices associated with ESG investing vary considerably. One reason for this is that 
ESG investing has evolved from socially responsible investment philosophies into a distinct form of 
responsibl e investing. While earlier approaches used exclusionary screening and value judgments to 
shape t heir investment decisions, ESG i nvesting has been spurred by shifts in demand from across the 
finance ecosystem, driven by both the search for better long -term financial value, and a pursuit of better 
alignment with values.  
This report provides an overview of concepts, assessments, and conducts quantitative analysis to shed 
light on both the progress and challenges with respect to the current state of ESG invest ing. It highlights 
the wide variety of metrics, methodologies, and approaches that, while valid, contribute to disparate 
outcomes, adding to a range of ESG investment practices that, in aggregate, arrive at an industry 
consensus on the performance of high -ESG portfolios, which may remain open to interpretation. The key 
findings of our analysis illustrate that ESG ratings vary strongly depending on the provider chosen, which 
can occur for a number of reasons, such as different frameworks, measures, key indic ators and metrics, 
data use, qualitative judgement, and weighting of subcategories. Moreover, returns have shown mixed 
results over the past decade, raising questions as to the true extent to which ESG drives performance. 
This lack of comparability of ESG metrics, ratings, and investing approaches makes it difficult for investors 
to draw the line between managing material ESG risks within their investment mandates, and pursuing 
ESG outcomes that might require a trade -off in financial performance.  
Despite th ese shortcomings, ESG scoring and reporting has the potential to unlock a significant amount of 
information on the management and resilience of companies when pursuing long -term value creation. It 
could also represent an important market based mechanism to  help investors better align their portfolios 
with environmental and social criteria that align with sustainable development. Yet, progress to strengthen 
the meaningfulness of ESG Investing calls for greater efforts toward transparency, consistency of metr ics, 
comparability of ratings methodologies, and alignment with financial materiality. Lastly, notwithstanding 
efforts by regulators, standard setting bodies, and private sector participants in different jurisdictions and 
regions, global guidance may be ne eded to ensure market efficiency, resilience and integrity.  
This report has been prepared to support the work of the OECD Committee on Financial Markets. It is part 
of a broader body of work to monitor developments in ESG rating and investing. The note and  
accompanying analysis has been prepared by Riccardo Boffo and Robert Patalano from the OECD 
Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs . It has  benefited from comments by members of the OECD 
Committee on Finan cial Markets, OECD colleagues Mathilde Me snard, Gera ldine Ang and Catriona 
Marshall,  and has been prepared for publication by Pamela Duffin,  Edward Smiley  and Karen Castillo.  
 
4    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Table of contents  
Foreword  3 
Executive summary  6 
Introduction  11 
ESG financial ecosystem, ratings methodologies, and investment approaches  14 
ESG investing and the investment fund industry  14 
ESG financial ecosystem  18 
ESG rating and indices  21 
ESG scoring results and performance  27 
ESG funds – investment approaches and strategies  32 
Critique and empirical assessment  37 
Literature review about “responsible investing” (ESG and others) performance  37 
OECD empirical research on ESG investing  40 
Market penetration and attributes  42 
ESG portfolio performance based on efficient frontiers  44 
Fama -French portfolio performance  48 
Assessing for bias  50 
Portfolio construction & tilting  52 
Review of funds’ performance  55 
ESG and policy developments  59 
Regulatory r eforms  59 
Considerations to strengthen global ESG practices  62 
References  68 
ESG financial ecosyste m 72 
Methodology  75 
Notes  80 
 
   5 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  FIGURES  
Figure  1. Breakdown of US assets professionally managed  16 
Figure  2. Drivers of ESG investing  16 
Figure  3. BNP - Drivers of ESG integration  17 
Figure  4. ESG financial ecosystem  19 
Figure  5. Reporting frameworks referenced in stock exchange ESG guidance  23 
Figure  6. SASB materiality map  25 
Figure  7. TCFD materiality framework  26 
Figure  8. S&P 500 ESG ratings correlation for different providers, 2019  28 
Figure  9. STOXX 600 ESG ratings correlation for different providers, 2019  28 
Figure  10. ESG rat ings and issuer credit ratings, 2019  29 
Figure  11. Fund managers’ incorporation of hedge fund strategies for ESG investing  35 
Figure  12. ESG market coverage share  42 
Figure  13. Market capitalisation as share of ESG by region, 2019  43 
Figure  14. ESG rating shift to a different score, 2013 -2018  44 
Figure  15. MSCI Minimum variance front ier and price index with base value 100, 2014 -2019  46 
Figure  16. STOXX Minimum variance frontier and price index with base value 100 , 2014 -2019  47 
Figure  17. Thomson Reuters Minimum variance frontier and price index with base value 100, 2014 -2019  48 
Figure  18. ESG top and bottom quintile Alpha by different providers, US, 2009 -2019  49 
Figure  19. Top and bottom ESG portfolios by provider, price index, base value 100, 2009 -2019  49 
Figure  20. Average company market capitalisation by ESG score and by different providers, 2019  50 
Figure  21. Small and large market capitalised stocks by top and bottom ESG rating by three providers, price 
index, base value 100, US, 2009 -2019  51 
Figure  22. Provider #2  51 
Figure  23. Provider #3  51 
Figure  24. E,S,G pillars top and bottom quintiles comparison between providers, Alpha, 2009 -2019  52 
Figure  25. Annualised Sharpe ratio by rating segregation for 5 different providers, World, 2009 -2019  53 
Figure  26. Annualised Sharpe ratio by rating segregation for 5 different providers, US, 2009 -2019  53 
Figure  27. E,S,G pillars annualised Sharpe ratio by rating segregation and provider, US, 2009 -2019  54 
Figure  28. United States annualised Sharpe ratio  by small capitalised companies ESG segregation for two 
providers, 2009 -2019  55 
Figure  29. 10 years and 5 years annualised funds’ pe rformance to Morningstar sustainability rating, 2019  56 
Figure  30. Distribution of 300 sustainable funds performances (5 stars), 201 9 57 
Figure  31. Distribution of 300 low sustainability funds performances (1 and 2 stars), 2019  57 
Figure  32. Relative performance of selected MSCI Indexes to MSCI ACWI Index  58 
 
TABLES  
Table  1. The spectrum of social and financial investing  15 
Table  2. ESG criteria  21 
Table  3. ESG criteria - major index providers  22 
Table  4. SSGA Assessment of R^2 of ESG ratings among major score providers  27 
Table  5. ESG sustainability investment sty les 33 
Table  6. Compounded Annual Growth Rate for different financial metrics for different providers  44 
 
 
 
6    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Executive s ummary  
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Investing  has grown rapidly over the past decade, and the 
amount of professionally managed portfolios that have integrated  key elements of  ESG assessments 
exceeds USD  17.5 trillion globally, by some measures.1 Also, the growth of ESG -related traded investment 
products available to institutional and retail investors exceeds USD  1 trillion and continues to grow quickly 
across major financial markets.  
The growing  investor  interest in ESG factors  reflects the view that environmental, social and corporate 
governance issues – including risks and opportunities -- can affect the long -term performance of issuers 
and should therefore be given appropriate consideration in investment decisions. While definitions differ 
regarding the form of consideration of ESG risks, broadly speaking ESG investing is an approach that 
seeks to incorporate environmental, social and governance factors into asset allocation and risk decisions, 
so as to generate sustainable, long -term financial returns.2 Thus, the extent to which the ESG approach 
incorporates forward -looking financially -material information  into expectations of returns and risks, and the 
extent to which it can help generate superior long -term returns, is the focus of this report . 
Over the past several years, considerable  attention has been given to ESG criteria and investing , due in 
part to at least three factors. First, recent  industry and academic studies suggest that ESG investing can, 
under certain conditions, help improve ris k management and lead to returns that are not inferior to returns 
from traditional financial investments . Despite the recent studies there is a growing awareness of the 
complexity of measuring ESG performances.  Second, growing societal attention to the ris ks from climate 
change, the benefits of globally -accepted standards of responsible business conduct, the need for diversity 
in the workplace and on boards, suggests that societal values will increasingly influence investor and 
consumer choices may increasi ngly impact corporate performance . Third, there is growing momentum for 
corporations and financial institutions to move way from short -term perspectives of risks and returns, so 
as to better reflect longer -term sustainability in investment performance . In this manner, some investors 
seek to enhance the sustainability of long -term returns, and others may wish to incorporate more 
formali sed alignment with societal values. In either case, there is growing evidence that the sustainability 
of finance must incorp orate broader external factors  to maximis e returns and profits over the long -term, 
while reducing the propensity for controversies that erode stakeholder trust.  
ESG investing has also recently garnered interest from the public sector , including central ban ks that have 
expressed support for ways to help transition financial systems toward “greener”, low -carbon economies.  
Numerous central banks in advanced and emerging market economies have committed to integrate ESG  
assessment and investing practices  into so me of their responsibilities, such as reserve management and 
supervisory practices including stress tests. Irrespective of the actual path of climate change, the decisions 
being made by corporations and financial intermediaries indicates that climate trans ition and physical  risks 
will increasingly affect the financial sector  and warrant inclusion in the assessment of financial stability .3  
In light of growing demand, the finance industry is creating more products and services  related to ESG 
ratings, indices , and funds . Firms calling themselves ESG ratings providers  have multiplied. The number 
of ESG indexes, equity and fixed income funds and ETFs are now in the many hundreds, and are 
continuing to expand . Investors can now engage in ESG investing through low -risk products such as 
   7 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  money market funds, passive smart beta ETFs, and can even take positions t hrough hedge funds that 
combine  sophisticated synthetic strategies with ESG alpha investing. Investors s eeking to position 
themselves for a transition to a low -carbon economy can invest in green transition and renewables funds. 
In this regard, t he financial markets have proven agile i n responding to investor demand  in a transparent 
and customer -oriented mann er. 
Notwithstanding this progress, the growth in use of ESG disclosure, ratings, and various types of ESG -
related funds has invited greater scrutiny from a range of market practitioners, and there is a growing 
awareness from within the industry that ESG in vesting practices need to evolve to meet the expectations 
of its users and to sustain trust. Various bodies , among which GRI, SASB and TCFD,  are now involved in 
assessing the use and consistency of ESG information, its materiality across industries, and ho w this 
information should be prior itised and scored.  
In light of these issues, this ESG report seeks to bridge the gap in knowledge by exploring concepts and 
definitions; key actors in the ESG ecosystem and their functions; and, challenges with respect to the 
investment ratings, fund categ orisations, and performance. It sought to identify and understand where ESG 
rating differences could contribute to different ESG scores that lead to divergences in high -ESG indices 
and portfolios.  
Outcomes of the assessme nt in Part I include the following:  
The ESG financial ecosystem is evolving, including issuers and investors who disclose and use 
information related to environmental, social and governance issues.  Financial intermediaries, as well 
as government and intern ational organisation institutions are influencing the emerging practises in ESG 
investing. While  constructive and inclusive  progress has been made to develop ESG practices by several 
ESG players , it has  generated the spread  of a wide array of investment te rminology, and disclosure 
frameworks which resulted in  metric inconsistencies and lack of comparability  for investors.  
In this regard, while ESG methodologies are improving and becoming more transparent, scoring 
remains in a state of transition, with some rating providers still in the way of refining  their 
methodology  through the inclusion of factors such as materiality . There is a range of scoring 
methodologies in terms of determining which data to analyse and include, metrics weighting, materiality 
and how to consider missing information. Moreover, subjective judgment is layered particularly regarding 
absolute and relative scores within and across industries . 
Even though progress ha s been made, a crucial point remains on the alignment with materiality 
factors. Different institutions, such as SASB and GRI among others, are focusing on the assessment of 
materiality that is applied to differ ent industries to determine the importance of each factor in the final ESG 
rating. This can depend on the business model, the external environment and the industry itself. The 
different materiality approaches have been influential in shaping the choice of key metrics used by the 
providers, but the discussion remains on the perspective on which metric is material.   
When the information from the issuers’ disclosure is retrieved and different key factors are weighted the 
final ESG score can be computed. Noneth eless, ESG ratings can vary greatly from one ESG provider 
to another . The different methodologies used to translate raw data into a more sophisticated rating suffer 
some level of criticism because of the wide variance in the results. This implies that if i nvestors are using 
and relying on different service providers, the score inputs that shape securities selection and weighting 
could be driven by choice of rating provider. This section assesses the extent to which ESG scores of 
major providers differ, and also how they compare to the dispersion of credit ratings across firms.  
The ESG score differences mentioned can occur for a number of reasons. They may relate to different 
frameworks, measures, key indicators and metrics, data use, qualitative judgement, a nd weighting 
of subcategories, reweighting of scores to ensure “best in class” in industries . While different 
methodologies, judgement and data are welcome to offer investors choice of approaches and outcomes, 
8    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  large differences in ESG ratings across provid ers may reduce the meaning of ESG portfolios that weight 
better -rated firms more highly.  
ESG ratings  can be used in a multitude of different investment approaches, which tend to conform 
to five distinct forms.  On one side, the least amount of complexity is  through excluding certain firms 
categorically (e.g. moral considerations), and on the other side is full ESG integration into the very firm 
culture of investing, such that it becomes an integrate pa rt of the investment processes . Approaches such 
as ESG rebalancing,  Thematic  Focus and ESG Impact  can be found in the middle . The choice of the 
strategy will greatly influence the final performance of the investment.  
Notwithstanding the progress to move forward sustainable investing through broader use of ESG factors 
and scoring,  there are  a number of challenges that may hinder further development in this rapidly 
growing and promising area of the market . Key issues for further consideration relate to: (i) ensuring 
relevance and consistency in reporting framewor ks for ESG disclosure; (ii) opacity of the subjective 
elements of ESG scoring; (iii) improving alignment with materiality and performance; (iv) overcoming the 
market bias; (v) transparency of ESG products alignment with investors’ sustainable finance objec tives 
related to financial and social returns; and, (vi) public and regulatory engagement.  
Part II  of the report endeavours  to complement the industry developments and assessments presented in 
Part I, by  providing  an assessment  based on academic literature  and OECD analysis of ESG scoring and 
benchmark performance, based on ESG databases of different providers.  
In terms of descriptive statistics, the size of the ESG investable shows market penetration of ESG 
scoring is still low based on number of companie s, but is much higher when measuring it by market 
capitalisation, which better represents the investable universe.  This suggests that there is ample room 
for investing using exclusion and tilting approaches while maintaining a sufficient level of diversifi cation.  
Also, there is evidence of an ESG ratings bias against SMEs for some providers , such that firms w ith 
much higher market capitalis ation and revenues consistently receive higher ESG scores than thos e with 
very low market capitalis ations .  
The predic tive power of ESG scores is inconsistent, and there is evidence that while some high -
ESG indices and portfolios can outperform the market, the same is true for low -ESG portfolios.   
Using different providers’ data, OECD secretariat  found an inconsistent cor relation between high ESG 
scores and returns, such that different providers lead to different results . This does not mean that all ESG 
portfolios underperformed the traditional market: however, many high -scoring ESG portfolios did 
underperform, and a numbe r of low -scoring ESG portfolios outperformed the markets.  
The analysis also found that asset concentration  associated with tilting portfolios toward high -
scoring ESG issuers can, depending on the conditions, affect volatility, risk -adjusted returns and 
drawdown risk. Various combinations of constructed portfolios based on tilts that provide greater 
exposure to higher -scoring issuers often performed at or below traditional indices for periods of time. The 
results are consistent with portfolio theory in that, greater concentration of exposures in a given portfolio 
can increase volatility, all else equal On the con trary, the analysis of maximum drawdown risk showed that 
ESG portfolios have a lower drawdown risk when compared to non -ESG portfolios.  
There was little differentiation in the performance of funds with higher -scoring and lower -scoring 
ESG securities; the w ide range of performance of funds across both categories indicates that a 
host of other factors, including particular investment strategies and their implementation, drive 
results. This result simply indicates that investors should not generalise about the  potential financial 
returns of funds based on ESG scores, and also suggests the importance of investor education related to 
retail ESG funds. At the same time, there is no evidence that preference for high ESG funds leads to 
underperformance, as other inv estment factors can affect results.  
   9 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  The assessments from Part I and II suggest that, to unlock the potential benefits of ESG investing 
for long -term sustainable finance, greater attention and efforts are needed to improve 
transparency, international consis tency  and comparability , alignment with materiality, and clarity 
in fund strategies as they relate to ESG . There is ample evidence to believe that abundant information 
about relevant environmental, social and governance factors, if provided in a rigorous a nd consistent 
manner, could help investors make better decisions about portfolio constructions and exp ectations of 
financial returns.  
Part III  reviews policy developments and considerations with respect to strengthening ESG practices 
globally.  
Policy devel opments across several major markets suggests that, while policy initiatives are at different 
stages of development, efforts are being made to strengthen ESG practices so that they are transparent, 
efficient, and fair. Regulatory initiatives related to sus tainable finance, and ESG in particular, are spanning 
topics such as taxonomy  and disclosure regarding issuers, ESG fund products and rating agency and 
benchmarks . In the EU  the European Commission has assessed practices and implications of 
sustainable fin ance , moving ahead on an ESG regulatory framework  and is about to unveil a Renewed 
Sustainable Finance Strategy , integral part of the European Green Deal , which will cover ESG data and 
ratings . Agencies and expert groups are prioritising sustainable financ e to promote sustainable 
investments and reduce the risks associated with a missing framework, such as greenwashing. Initiatives 
in the United States are based upon the principles -based approach to overseeing disclosure of 
non-financial information by publ icly-listed companies. The US SEC is engaging in consideration 
of ESG investing through several avenues, including recent steps regarding the review of ESG 
disclosure and the naming of funds with ESG (or similar) investment mandates. . Japan  is also 
paying attention to ESG developments and in 2018 created a label to identify companies that are 
reporting on ESG performance, as part of efforts to improve corporate disclosure and improve the 
long -term investing landscape . More work has been done with respect to  how institutional 
investors consider ESG factors.  
The assessment of ESG factors suggest that, notwithstanding progress to enhance data availability and 
analysis, further efforts by policy -makers, financial market participants and other stakeholders will b e 
needed to strengthen ESG practices. Given the work in progress across regulatory bodies and financial 
markets is progressing in varying speeds and directions, the following high -level considerations would help 
bring global consistency to allow various co nstituencies to focus their efforts within and across markets.  
The considerations reflect 5 key areas, including:  
Ensuring consistency, comparability and quality of core metrics in reporting frameworks for ESG 
disclosure . Despite the efforts  to improve ESG  disclosure the reporting of ESG factors still suffers from 
considerable shortcomings that undermine its usefulness to investors.  
Ensuring relevance of reporting through financial materiality over the medium and long -term . 
Currently, ESG reporting and ratings approaches generally do not sufficiently clarify either financial 
materiality or non -financial materiality (e.g. social impact), so investors are lacking  a clear picture of the 
issues that are likely to directly impact  the financial condition of a company . 
Levelling the playing field between large and small issuers related to ESG disclosure and ratings . 
Research suggests that there is an ESG scoring bias in favour of large -cap companies, and against SMEs. 
This burden, m ay be due in part to the ability of large firms to dedicate more resources to reporting  and 
poses a market inefficiency to the extent it affects both relative cost of capital and corporate reputation.  
Promoting the transparency and comparability of scorin g and weighting methodologies of 
established ESG ratings providers and indices . Evidence indicates that major ESG providers’  outputs 
give rise to several challenges. A very low degree of correlation as to what constitutes a high or low -scoring 
10    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG -scoring issuer , wide differences in factor subcategories below the E, S, and G, the number of metrics, 
their wei ghting, and subjective judgment  all undermines comparability . 
Appropriate labelling and disclosure of ESG products to adequately inform investors of how  ESG 
is used  in the investment process and asset selection . A number of factors, in addition to ESG 
considerations, are driving returns. They include investment objectiv es and risk tolerance and strategy  
among others. In this respect, it would be very dif ficult to assess the ESG contribution to portfolio returns 
relative to other factors . Therefore, it would be important to inform investors through comparable and 
consistent metrics that align with financial materiality, to allow market participants to make investment and 
voting decisions in line with their investment objectives and risk tolerance.  
Further efforts are needed to strengthen ESG practices so that they are consistent and comparable at the 
global level involving policy -makers, the financial indust ry, end -investors and other stakeholders that are 
helping to shape ESG practices. To ensure further progress in ESG, improve investors’ confidence in the 
instrument and reduce the risk of market fragmentation there is scope for the OECD to facilitate aware ness 
and discussion of challenges and solutions related to ESG investing, including the need for guidance on 
improving consistency and transparency, alignment with materiality, frameworks, and good practices of 
benchmark and fund reporting.  
 
   11 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Introduction  
Sustainable finance is generally referred  to as the process of considering  environmen tal, social and 
governance  factors  when making investment decisions, leading to increased longer -term investments into 
sustainable economic activities and projects . Its growth has been driven by the desire of investors to have 
an environmental and social impact, along with the economic performance of investing. This growth is a 
response to a larger trend which saw many countries around the world to mobilise efforts to contribute to 
a global improvement. Now finance is taking its active position in trying to implement these concepts in the 
investing practice. The instrument that was born from this will is the Environmental, social, and governance  
(ESG) rating, from wh ich ESG Investing is developed.  
Environmental, social, and governance (“ESG”) investing has evolved in recent years to meet the demands 
of institutional and retail investors, as well as certain public sector authorities, that wish to better incorporate 
long-term financial risks and opportunities into their investment decision -making process es to generate 
long-term value . Among the long -term factors environmental, social and governance categories can 
include  controversies and downside risks that have the po tential to erode equity value and increase credit 
risk over time. As such, it aims to combine better risk management with improved portfolio returns, and to 
reflect investor and beneficiary values in an investment strategy.4  In this respects, the investme nt 
community has come to consider ESG as an investment  approach that seeks to incorporate greater and 
more consistent information regarding material environmental, social, and governance developments, risks 
and opportunities, into asset allocation and risk  management decisions, so as to generate sustainable, 
long-term financial returns.5  
In addition, the approach can equally serve to aid investors and other stakeholders in their effort to use 
environmental, social and governance  information for ethical or impact investing, in which financial returns 
are not the primary focus of the investors objective.  In this regard, t here is a rising demand by these 
investor types to improve the alignment of their portfolios with societal value s, such as related to slowing 
climate change, improving socially just practices, and ensuring high standards of corporate governance.  
ESG disclosure is gaining in acceptance because it can provides a useful tool for issuers to assess and 
communicate their  socially responsible practices, and for investors that seek to assess the potential for 
social returns in a consistent manner across companies and over time.  
In concept, over the medium -to-long term, issuers that take into account these societal issues a re more 
likely to avoid controversies and improve their reputations, better retain customers and employees, and 
maintain the trust of shareholders during periods of uncertainty and transition. However, at the present 
time, the extent to which the current E SG practices are sufficiently unlocking material informati on that is 
accessible and utilis ed by investors in an effective manner  remains an open question. Notwithstanding the 
vital importance of the societal alignment  of investments , the promise of sustain able finance for long -term 
value is the focus of this report.  As such, it aims to contribute to a better understand ing of  the extent to 
which ESG  investment processes and practices are contributing to strengthening transparency  and market 
integrity, and are delivering intended results.  
There is growing evidence that investors and financial intermediaries  are increasingly factoring ESG 
assessments  into investment decisions.  As of 2018, the number of signatories of the UN Principles of 
12    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Responsible Investment (UN PRI) that commit to pursue ESG integration has grown to over 2  300 
signatories among institutional investors . The top reason  professional  investors consider ESG -related 
information is not to derive reputational benefit but to determine whether a company is adequately 
managing risk  and aligning its strategy for long -term returns . In more recent investor  surveys, the pursuit 
of maximis ation o f financial returns and enhanced risk -management have been consistently highlighted as 
key motivating reasons for committing to ESG integration.6 
The growth of ESG has faced difficulties in entering mainstream investment strategies until recent years. 
This may have been due in part to investors' misperceptions that sustainable investment limits choice and 
compromises key financial objectives. However, the rapid growth and diversification of ESG funds and 
investment strategies suggest that the industry is un dergoing a transformation. There is mixed evidence 
that ESG investing in some of its forms is able to provide a societal benefit w ithout sacrificing financial  
returns relative to performance of  traditional portfolios , yet the extent to which ESG can contri bute to 
strengthening long -term value through the incorporation of an array of non -financial information would 
benefit from further assessment .7 
At the same time, ESG terms and practices have not been clearly defined, and meanings differ across 
stakeholder s, particularly across borders. T here appear to be several core  approaches to ESG investing, 
including negative and positive screening  (inclusion and exclusion), tilting portfolios aligned with ESG 
scores, and also ESG impact and integration practices. At the same time, these approaches are at times 
combined with investing strategies – such as alpha, momentum, and long -short – that could in turn alter 
asset selection in portfolios.  Moreover, the lack of standardis ed reporting practices and transparency, and  
the difficulty of translating qualitative information in numerical information , creates a barrier in the proper 
integration of sustain ability factors into investment decisions.   
The OECD has been involved in developing responsible investment in a number o f ways. The OECD 
Guidelines for Responsible Business Conduct for Institutional Investors; a report on investment 
governance and the integration of ESG factors; and setting forth a consultation for supervisory guidelines 
on the integration of ESG factors in  the investment and risk management in pension funds. Also, on 
environmental issues, the OECD has developed numerous papers on sustainable finance and climate 
change. Also, it recently issued a report on Social Impact Investment 2019, highlighting the impa ct 
imperative for sustainable development.  
In light of the growing questions regarding ESG practices, the OECD’s Committee on Financial Markets 
has explored the developments related to various market participants and influencers that are shaping 
ESG pract ices; the materiality of ESG disclosures; the usefulness of ESG ratings; and, performance of 
ESG indices and funds. As well, it has engaged with the industry to better understand practices, including 
the benefits and potential shortcomings that could under mine adoption. Challenges relate to transparency, 
consistency, materiality, and the ability of financial consumers to understand both the loose taxonomy and 
how it relates to portfolio composition, returns and risks. This is particularly relevant where inv estors have 
expectati ons that they are able to utilis e ESG to align with financial returns as well as societal values 
related to environmental, social and good governance practices.  
This report  covers the following topics:  
Part I  maps ESG industry particip ants, ratings methodologies, and investment approaches.  
Section 2  provides an overview of the definitions of ESG investing, how it is differentiated from social 
investing and purely financial investing, and drivers of its growth. It explores the distinctio n between end -
investors who find appeal in ESG approaches due to their desire to align their investments with societal 
values, and the pressures on professional asset managers who are tasked with delivering superior financial 
returns on an absolute or risk -adjusted basis.  
Section 3 briefly illustrates  the ESG financial ecosystem, in terms of various market participants and other 
stakeholders involved in providing ESG information, ratings, indices, and investment products . It illustrates 
   13 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  that with numerous interwoven efforts to identify, prioritise and integrate information and assessments, 
there are now an abundance of ESG ratings and investment approaches, such that numerous 
interpretations of ESG currently exist. This clouds meaningfulness of outcomes.  
Section 4 reviews the ESG scoring proces ses, in terms of methodology and the use of particular metric 
categories, and also considers materiality .  It highlights both good progress, but illustrates that the 
integration of consistent and material reporting of non-financial information  for ESG ratings  remains a work 
in progress .  
Section 5 assesses ESG scoring performance relative to traditional indices and credit ratings , and 
explores ratings methodologies  to understand what factors may be contributing to the wide variance in 
results .  
Section 6 considers ESG investment approaches and particular fund strategies . It explores the extent to 
which different traditional strategies, in combination with ESG approa ches, could influence results.   
Part II seeks to determine how ESG investment strategies have performed relative to traditional 
indices, and the extent to which they have delivered financial value over the medium term.   
Section 7 reviews academic and ind ustry literature of ESG and other forms of responsible investing. While 
the literature on return s is mixed, there is some  academic literature and a growing body  of industry research  
that forms of ESG performance can either perform equal to  traditional mark et-weighed investments or , in 
certain circumstances,  exceed them. This has drawn attention to the prospect that with the right 
methodologies, investors can reap financial returns and align their investments with societal values.  
Section 8 offers an OECD staff assessment of ESG scoring, benchmark and fund performance based on 
several prominent industry databases. The assessment builds on several strands of portfolio theory, 
including Markowitz modern portfolio theory and Fama -French factor models, to assess how various ESG 
indices, portfolios, and funds have performed against traditional market investments over the past decade, 
and also during the Covid -19 crisis. The OECD findings are meant to offer a preliminary perspective 
based on empiri cal an alysis, yet recognis es that different databases and other ratings providers , 
different from the ones used,  could lead to materially different results.  
Based on these observations and analytical findings , Part III provides an overview of key challeng es and 
potential steps to help ensure that ESG methodologies and investing contribute to market transparency, 
confidence, and integrity.  
 
 
 
14    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG investing and the investment fund indu stry  
 ESG within the investment spectrum  
ESG investing exists within a broader spectrum of investing based on financial and social returns. On one 
side of the spectrum , pure financial investment is pursued to maximise shareholder and debtholder value 
through financial returns based on absolute or risk -adjusted measures of financial value. At best, it 
assumes the efficiency of capital markets will effectively allocate resources to parts of the economy that 
maximise benefits, and contributes more broadly to  economic development. On the other side of the 
spectrum, pure social “investing, such as philanthropy, seeks only social returns, such that the investor 
gains from confirming evidence of benefits to segments or all of society, in particular related to 
environmental or social benefits, including with regard to human and worker rights, gender equality.  Social 
impact investing seeks a blend of social return and financial return – but the prioritisation of social or 
financial returns depends on the extent to w hich the investors are willing to compromise one for the other 
in alignment with their overall objectives.  
Within this spectrum , ESG investing  focuses on maximising financial returns, and utilises ESG factors to 
help assess risks and opportunities, particu larly over the medium to long -term.  What differentiates it from 
purely commercial investing is that it takes into account factors other than assessment of short -term 
financial performance and commercial risks to that performance. In this manner, ESG invest ing 
incorporates the risk assessment of long -term environmental, social and governance challenges and 
developments.  Also, it appears to take into account, to varying degrees, some element of positive 
behaviour that aligns with limiting spill overs or othe rwise protecting the environment, responsible business 
conduct on social /worker issues, and good practice in corporate governance. The extent to which ESG 
investment incorporates social impact in a manner that increases financial risks (volatility and tra cking error 
relative to an index) or reduces expected financial returns, would suggest that it is more al igned with social 
impact funds.  
The distinction between ESG funds and social impact funds is still not clear, and there remains some 
ambiguity in the m arket that could be better addressed by the financial industry, third -party providers, and 
international organisations. This can be the consequence of the use of ESG ratings as a broader instrument 
serving different purposes for different investors. While some investors use ESG as a tool for risk 
management, some others use it to improve their position on sustainable finance in order to align with 
societal and impact issues.  
 ESG financial ecosystem, ratings 
methodologies, and investment 
approaches  
   15 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Table  1. The spectrum of social and financial investing  
 Philanthropy  Social Impact  Investing  Sustainable and 
Responsible 
Investing8 Conventional 
financial 
investing  
 Traditional 
Philanthropy  Venture 
Philanthropy  Social Investing  Impact investment  ESG investing  Fully commercial 
investment  
 | | | | | | 
Focus  Address societal 
challenges through 
the provision of 
grants  Address societal 
challenges with 
venture investment 
approaches  Investment with a 
focus on social 
and/or 
environmental 
outcome and 
some expected 
financial r eturn  Investment with an 
intent to have a 
measurable 
environmental 
and/or social 
return  Enhance long -term 
value by using ESG 
factors to mitigate 
risks and identify 
growth 
opportunities.  Limited or no 
regard for 
environmental, 
social or 
governance 
practices  
 | | | | | | 
Return 
Expectation  Social return only  Social return 
focused  Social return and 
sub-market 
financial return  Social return and 
adequate financial 
market rate  Financial market 
return focused on 
long-term value  Financial market 
return only  
 Social impact   Social and financial   Financial returns  
Source:  stylised adaptation from OECD (2019), “Social Impact Investment, the Impact Imperative for Sustainable Development,” based on earlier 
versions from various organisations ; for illustrative purposes only.  
Recent industry terminology acknowledges that as demand for ESG products reflect desire for long -term 
value as well as alignment with social values, the spectrum of sustainable finance funds include 
approaches that involve ESG exclusion, ESG  inclusion, and also impact. 9  While the ESG approaches will 
be described later in this report, it is notable that impact investing is considered, along with ESG investing, 
as a sustainable form of finance, because it seeks to generate a positive social r eturn that is measurable 
and reportable, alongside a financial return. In this aspect, the use of ESG metrics and approaches within 
both responsible ESG investing for long -term value, and sustainable impact investing that seeks social 
returns alongside  financial returns rather to explicitly enhance long -term returns, remains a source of 
ambiguity that has contributed to the proliferation of ESG metrics and methodologies to serve dual 
purposes.10 
Several developments have contributed to growth of ESG investin g, distinct from social impact and 
traditional financial investments. First, societal demands by non -investors: the transition from the 
shareholder to stakeholder model has challenged the notion that the firm only serves shareholders, as the 
needs of other  stakeholders have encouraged the growth of corporate social responsibility in business and 
even government entities. This has invited reporting on issues that relate to good practices and standards 
that do not relate to short -term financial returns but ar e thought to contribute to long -term value, such as 
by strengthening reputation, brand loyalty, and talent retention. Second, greater demand by social impact 
investors for data related to E, S, and also G factors, related to good practices. Third, the dema nd by ESG 
investors through responsible investing to take a more sustainable perspective, which can both benefit 
from risk management elements of ESG and also better align with societal values.  The implications of 
these distinct drivers are explored in th e next section.  
ESG investing – market dimensions and drivers  
The growth of assets under management that incorporates some element of ESG review and decision -
making has grown exponentially over the past decade. In the US, the current level of ESG investing  is now 
over 20% of all professionally managed assets, at over USD  11 trillion.11 In Europe, industry data related 
to a broader range of ESG practices suggests the level is over USD  17 trillion. Due to institutional and 
retail investors desire for pooled in vestments and liquidity,  ESG  investment fund and ETF has grown to Use of  ESG metrics and methodologies  
16    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  over USD  1 trillion in the US, and less so in Europe and Asia.  Also, the growing development of ESG 
products, s uch as ESG funds, has exceeded USD 1 trillion in assets under management. The  data from 
Morningstar, which include open -ended funds and exchange traded funds, show that the number of 
launches of funds that use ESG criteria increased from 140 globally in 2012 to 564 last year.    
Figure  1. Breakdown of US assets professionally managed  
 
Source: US SIF (2018), “Sustainable and Responsible Investing.”  
Given the aspects of financial and social returns that influence the use of ESG metrics and methodologies, 
further consideration of the societal drivers of ESG investing is warranted. A main observation of recent 
surveys by private sector participants is that interests in the use of ESG range widely across social and 
financial considerations: institutional investors clearly focus on the benefits of ESG investing for financial 
returns and risk management, while end -investors focus more on alignment of portfolios with societal values.  
Figure  2. Drivers of ESG investing  
 
Source: Merrill Lynch Wealth Management  
Social or 
moral 
considerations
77%Desire to 
mitigate risk
14%Desire for 
alpha
6%Other
3%
   17 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   Surveys suggest that institut ional investors and professional asset managers seek to use ESG primarily 
to compete on improved risk adjusted returns and risk management. A study of 120 institutional investors 
conducted by Morgan Stanley concluded that 70% have integrated sustainable in vestment criteria into 
their decision -making, and an additional 14% are actively considering it.12 A 2019 survey from BNP of 
institutional investors and asset managers notes that over half of the respondents are seeking to integrate 
ESG due to improved long -term returns, followed by firm reputation. Less than 30% pursue this for altruistic 
values or diversification of product offering.13 Also, ESG is being incorporated into other portfolio products, 
such as ETFs. A survey by Bank of America illustrates that g rowth in ESG smart beta strategies has been 
faster than that of many other types of strategies (though it is likely that this sharp growth is from a very 
low base). Moreover, at the current pace, some players expect ESG investing through funds and ETFs to 
grow to several trillion within several years.  
Figure  3. BNP - Drivers of ESG integration  
 
Source: BNP  
Other finance industry surveys indicate that drivers of growth in forms of ESG investing, and the rotation 
away from purely commercial investing, has been due to end investors’ desire to improve corporate and 
other issuers’ alignment with social and moral considerations (Figure 2) . Only about 20% sought these 
strategies primarily for financial returns or reducing investment risks.14 In terms of demographics, several 
studies show that Millennials are driving both current investing in ESG and impact investing,  while 
Generation X is also strongly supporting this shift.  
These societal trends mirror a growing recognition of the importance of realigning global financial toward 
sustainability in two important ways that relate to climate change and ethical standards of development:  
Greater attention to the need for finance to better incorporate the potential impacts of climate change  is 
increasingly influencing the behaviours of investors, financial markets and financial institutions. Following 
the Paris Agreement in 2016, various international bodies have assessed the need for international finance 
to support the transition to low -carbon economies by committing capital to modernising infrastructures, 
renewable energy, and away from brown industries.15 In this respect, the OECD has estimated that nearly 
USD 7  trillion a year is required up to 2030 to meet climate and development objectives.16 This report 
recommended that authorities take steps towards a more climate -consistent global financial system by 
assessing and addr essing possible misalignments within financial regulations and practices, improving the 
ability of markets to price climate change risks, and assessing the risks climate change poses to financial 
20%26%27%27%32%33%37%47%52%
Diversification of the product offer*Board/activist investor pressureAltruistic valuesAttraction of new talentExternal stakeholder requirementRegulatory/disclosure demandsDecreased investment riskBrand image and reputationImproved long-term returns
*option for asset manager respondents only
Please rank (1 -3) why you incorporate ESG into your investment 
decision -making
18    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  stability. Subsequently, a number of central banks in OECD m ember countries have turned their attention 
to the potential impact of climate change on the global financial system. A recent report by the Network for 
the Greening of the Financial System, comprised of these central banks and observing members such as 
the OECD, highlights the ways that ESG, among various tools for green investment, can be used by central 
banks in reserve management to help steer investments to better align with low -carbon economies.17  
The societal demand for higher ethical standards of ec onomic growth  through finance and business 
practices is also contributing to greater demand for ESG tools that can help measure and benchmark these 
practices. A key set of standards for ESG, and particularly the Social pillar, is the UN Global Compact, 
which highlights ten principles related to ethical standards related to human rights, labour, anti -corruption, 
and the environment. The OECD’s due diligence guidelines for responsible business conduct helps 
businesses contribute  to economic, environmental and  social progress, especially by minimising  the 
adverse impacts of their operations, supply chains and other business relationships.18 It includes human 
rights, employee and industrial relations, environment, combatting bribery, and consumer interests. 
Moreo ver, investors that seek to align investment strategies with ethical global development objectives, 
such as the Sustainability Development Goals, are seeking investment products that can help to improve 
alignment.19 Metrics related to ethical standards, inc luding these UN and OECD guidelines, are 
incorporated in some frameworks for ESG assessment so that investors are able to assess and compare 
behaviours of issuers when making investment decisions.  
Notwithstanding this welcome progress, the sharp growth of ESG investing has brought with it a growing 
number of participants that influence the creation of disclosure frameworks, ESG metric, ratings 
methodologies, and products from funds to indices. As forms of ESG investing continue to grow and 
proliferate, diff ering motives and lack of clarity over the specific types of investing that utilise ESG metrics 
and methodologies may be contributing to emerging challenges related to consistency and comparability, 
which risk undermining ESG meaningfulness and integrity. The next section seeks to explore these actors 
and behaviours in more detail.  
ESG f inancial ecosystem  
The growth and institutionalisation of ESG approaches and methodologies calls for a thorough 
understanding of the various contributors that have contribut ed to the institutionalisation of the ESG  
financial ecosystem. This ecosystem, as illustrated in the diagram below, includes issuers and investors 
who disclose and use information related to environmental, social and governance issues. As well, of focus 
in this note, is (i) an intertwined network of financial intermediaries and analytical service providers, and 
(ii) an array of non -government government, private sector and international organisations that are 
influencing the emerging practices in ESG invest ing. This section explores the key actors, the role they 
play, and how the activities bring benefits by contributing to a much greater amount of forward -looking 
information that benefits financial and social investors alike.  Moreover, it has the potential  to better align 
strategic asset allocation that contributes to enhanced long -term value while incentivising responsible 
business conduct among issuers. At the same time, ESG practices remain at a relatively early stage of 
development, and the activities o f various institutional participants that develop or utilise frameworks and 
metrics have yet to arrive at common globally consistent terms and practices.  
   19 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  4. ESG f inancial ecosystem  
 
Source: OECD staff illustration  
Issuers,  investment and the intermediation chain  
Financial Issuers.  Financial issuers are any issuers that supply equity or debt to the financial markets – 
either public or private  – and demand capital from investors . In this respect, issues from sovereigns to 
SME s are increasing providing information regarding environmental, social and governance at the request 
of investors, ESG ratings providers, credit rating agencies, and other motivated stakeholders (e.g. climate 
or human rights NGOs) . In concept, all issuers are part of the ESG ecosystem because ESG assessment 
is demanded by a growing number of investors who are seeking to analyse information that comes from 
issuers directly, and also other sources including financial and social media.  
ESG ratings providers . ESG  ratings providers  include those firms that are providing assessments of 
equity and debt issuers based on their disclosures that explicitly or implicitly offer sustainability metrics and 
information that help determine ESG scores. Some of the ratings ar e based on  highly quantitative  
methodologies , using and weighing numerous subcategory metrics based on identified quantitative data, 
either offered by corporate issuers or taken  from other industry data sources. Large ESG providers  include 
MSCI, Sustainaly tics, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, and RobecoSAM. Also, traditional ratings agencies 
such as Moody’s , S&P and Fitch  now also provide forms of ESG ratings.  
ESG index providers.  A number of providers  are also index providers, such as MSCI, FTSE Russell, 
Bloom berg, Thomson Reuters, Vigeo Eiris, etc. The use of such indices is growing rapidly as means to 
track  relative performance  of various ESG tilted market portfolios, from which institutional investors can 
benchmark performance .  These index providers offer a  range of styli sed benchmarks that in turn allow for 
fund products to be developed for passive or active investment, and also for portfolio managers to utilis e 
as a benchmark to compare their ability to generate excess risk -adjusted returns.   Also, such indices are 
used by ESG funds and ETFs for passive and active investment management. By virtue of their growing 
use as benchmarks for ESG investing, the ways in which indices are created, including exclusion, extent 
of tilting portfolios towar d issuers with higher ESG scores, and other forms such as thematic indices (e.g. 
high “S” issuers), is currently highly influential in guiding overall ESG portfolio management.  
ESG users: asset managers, institutional investors, and public authorities . The users of ESG ratings 
and information include, at the very least, types of investors across private and public entities. While many 

20    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  of these investor types also perform their own due diligence and forms of ESG integration, the use of 
externa scores often f orms a part of their overall assessment.  
Asset managers / investment funds  create segregated portfolios, and investment products such as 
investment funds and ETFs, are using ESG ratings and information to derive their own ratings, to make 
portfolio composi tion decisions.   
Institutional investors  (e.g. insurance companies and pension funds ) may incorporate ESG ratings for 
portfolio management, and to align with their fiduciary duty to incorporate forward -looking material 
information in their investment proce ss.20  
Public sector  institutions , including central banks and public debt issuers , have begun to consider the 
importance and need for ESG integration. A key reason is that central bank reserve managers increasingly 
seek long -term financial sustainability o f their portfolios, and are striving to assess climate transition risks 
and the market impact of investors’ shift toward lower carbon -intense industries.21  
ESG framing, guidance and oversight.  Loosely defined,  ESG framing, guidance and oversight includes 
an array of enabling actors that influence and help broadly define forward -looking, non-financial reporting, 
including with respect to financial materiality, as well as societal alignment, to help ensure long -term 
sustainability of the investments.  
Many ar e disclosure bodies  that include framework developers and providers, such as disclosure 
standard setters, and exchange and self -regulating bodies that offer disclosure guidance and good 
practices to members .  
Framework developers and providers that have ma de substantial contributions to the development of ESG 
disclosure frameworks include Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) , which focuses on 
financial materiality,  and the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) , and International Integrated Reporting 
Council (IIRC). Also, framework providers specific to climate risks include the Taskforce on Climate -related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD), and the Climate Disclosures Standards Board (CDSB), which reflect 
financial and environmental materiality to varying degrees.  
Bodies that develop and/or implement formal rules and requirements  include market regulators and 
supervisors of financial institutions , and also exchanges and self -regulating bodies . 
Oversight authorities,  such as markets regulators, and insurance and pensions supervisors, are increasing 
engaged in assessing ESG taxonomies and disclosure.22 While over 60% of market regulators state that 
their regulatory mandates do not include any specific references to ESG matters, many of them consider 
that ESG issues are relevant to their work. This is because ESG market products can affect investor 
protection and financial stability, and more than half of securities regulators are responsible for the 
registration and auth orisation of investment firms that provide ESG financial products.23 
Stock exchanges, self -regulating and other financial industry bodies, have also contributed to assessing 
ESG practices and promulgating good disclosure practices. They include the World Fe deration of 
Exchanges, many national exchanges (discussed further in the next section) and bodies ranging from 
FINRA to the CFA Institute.  
Lastly, there are standard setters for ethical and responsible conduct , including international 
organisations that set standards and guidelines regarding responsible investing and sustainability goals. 
Standard setters including UN, OECD, and the International Organisation for standardisation are among 
organisations that have standards that are used by framework provid ers with respect to social and also 
environmental standards.  The GRI, in particular, has sought to incorporate ethical standards of various 
international organisations and NGOs into its reporting frameworks.  
Given the number of organisations in regional a nd global forms that seek to coordinate the reporting of 
forward -looking information in issuer disclosures, the integration of consistent and financially material 
   21 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  reporting of ESG information remains a work in progress.  In addition to the numerous sources of standards 
frameworks, and guidelines, the ways in which disclosure information and metrics have been incorporated 
into ESG methodologies has further contributed to challenges of ESG investing.  
ESG rating and indices  
One of the key ways in which investor s and other market participants make use of ESG information is 
through ESG ratings, which they obtain from established ESG raters. Therefore, the ESG ratings process 
and how such ratings are converted into indices will be the focus of this section, because  it contributes to 
an important transformation of raw ESG disclosure into investment products from which investors can 
make decisions and take actions. Given that ESG ratings are commercially available and widely used, our 
analysis will focus on their data  and methodologies as an indication of how the financial industry is coming 
to terms with ESG assessment.  
There is a wide range of rating practices in terms of determining which data to include, how to weigh 
metrics in terms of materiality, and layering su bjective judgment as to absolute and relative scores within 
and across industries . While ESG methodologies are becoming more robust, and there is more back 
testing of scores against performance, scoring remains in a state of transition.  
In order to facili tate the further growth of ESG investing through funds and ETFs, which rely on indices 
from which to develop active and passive strategies, a growing number of  third party analytical firms, 
including index providers and rating agencies, have helped develop  the market segment through scoring 
and index development.  This includes  market data providers such as Bloomberg, Morningstar and 
Thomson Reuters and firms more focused on financial services such as MSCI.  
The methodologies adopted by these providers  are intrinsically different but the final ratings are used by 
market investors for the same purpose, which is to identify companies that adopted better ESG practices. 
In this regard the analysis of the methodological approaches will be beneficial to under stand which factors 
are driving the final ESG ratings.  
ESG Scoring: k ey criteria  & indicators  
Index scoring approaches begin with the consideration of relevant criterial within each of the E, S, and G 
factors to further articulate the drivers (Figure 7 ). Environmental factors can include natural resource use, 
carbon emissions, energy efficiency, pollution and sustainability initiatives. Social factors can include 
workforce related issues (health, diversity, training), and broader societal issues such as hu man rights, 
data privacy, and community engagement. A poor environmental record may make a firm vulnerable to 
legal action or regulatory penalties; poor treatment of workers may lead to high absenteeism, lower 
productivity, and weak client relations; and w eak cor porate governance can incentivis e unethical 
behaviours related to pay, accounting and disclosure irregularities, and fraud.  
Table  2. ESG criteria  
Environmental factors  Social factors  Governance factors  
Natural resource use  Workforce  Board independence  
Carbon emissions  Human rights  Board diversity  
Energy efficiency  Diversity  Shareholder rights  
Pollution/waste  Supply chain  Management compensation  
Environmental opportunities   
Corporate ethics  
Source: ESG Rating providers, OECD, selected themes for illustration.  
22    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Given the influences of ratings providers, the differences in ratings methodologies, and their level of 
transparency in final rating decisions that also incorporate qualitative judgments, are critical to 
understandin g the resilience of the ESG financial intermediation chain.  
Every providers ranks different aspects of the sustainability of the companies it asses. This aspects are 
then aggregated to create a key metric, which usually defines one of the elements supporti ng the pillars 
(E, S and G). These metrics are the result of the aggregation of different submetrics, which measure 
specific aspects of how an enterprise uses its resources.  
MSCI and Sustainalytics state that their services are designed to help investors identify and understand 
financially material ESG risks and opportunities, in order to integrate these factors into their portfolio 
construction and management process.  
Thomson Reuters uses more than 400 different ESG metrics, of which a subset of 186 fiel ds are selected, 
with history going back to 2002. The ESG metrics are then grouped into ten categories (Resource use, 
Emissions, Innovation, workforce, human rights, community, product responsibility, management, 
shareholders and CSR strategy) which are co mbined to formulate the three pillar scores of Environmental, 
Social and Governance.  
Bloomberg provides proprietary ESG data that provides metric selection with particular attention given to 
environmental and social impact metrics. In this case, industrie s are grouped into broad categories for 
metrics selection: higher, medium, and lower environmental impact, and higher and lower social impact, 
while governance metrics are the same for each industry.  
Table  3. ESG criteria - major index providers  
Pillar  Thomson Reuters  MSCI  Bloomberg  
Environmental  Resource Use  Climate Change  Carbon Emissions  
Emissions  Natural resources  Climate change effects  
Innovation  Pollution & waste  Pollution  
 Environmental opportunities  Waste disposal  
  Renewable energy  
  Resource depletion  
Social  Workforce  Human capital  Supply chain  
Human Rights  Product liability  Discrimination  
Community  Stakeholder opposition  Political contributions  
Product Responsibility  Social opportunities  Diversity  
  Human rights  
  Community relations  
Governance  Management  Corporate governance  Cumulative voting  
Shareholders  Corporate behaviour  Executive compensation  
CSR strategy   Shareholders’ rights  
  Takeover defence  
  Staggered boards  
  Independent directors  
Key metrics and submetrics  186 34 >120  
Source: Refinitiv, MSCI, Bloomberg, FTSE; OECD assessment.  
Given the difficulty in reporting metrics related to sustainability, different stakeholders have called for the 
need to have more standardised reporting guidelines. 80 exchanges have published their own ESG 
reporting guidelines and many more are willing to do so.24 For example, NASDAQ issued a report to help 
   23 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  companies report on ESG, with a focus on 30 metrics, ten for each pillar.25 The NASDAQ  reporting is 
particularly useful as it integrates metrics that are part of existing guidelines and principles.  While progress 
is being made, exchanges incorporate a range of reporting frameworks that have different purposes with 
respect to financial mater iality and ethical standards (see Figure 5). In this respect, many exchanges 
recognise that t here is still no convergence on ESG standards and formats adopted by the exchanges 
industry , and  some WFE members raised the global divergence on ESG standards and  practices as a new 
concern in their sustainability efforts .26  
Figure  5. Reporting frameworks referenced in stock exchange ESG guidance  
 
Note: In percentage out of 100  
Source: Sustainable Stock Exchange Initiative (2020), “ESG Dis closure Guidance Database”.  GRI is Global Reporting Initiative; IIRC is 
International Integrated Reporting Council; SASB is Sustainability Accounting Standards Board; , CDP is a non -profit disclosure provider for 
sustainability, TCFD is the Taskforce on Cl imate -related Financial Disclosures; CDSB is Climate Disclosure Standards Board.  
Framework providers and alignment with  materiality factors  
Given that ESG investing seeks to deliver long -term value, this section further explores the extent to which 
ESG met rics and methodologies effectively or even sufficiently capture financial materiality in their 
approaches, particularly in a transparent and quantifiable manner.  
General materiality factors  
The choice of metrics that issuers are being guided to disclose ne ed to relate to financial materiality in 
order to be relevant for investors, and as such have relevance for other stakeholders such as exchanges 
and securities regulators. Yet, the concept of financial materiality takes on an expanded meaning when it 
is co nsidered within the ESG framework, which engages in non-financial  disclosures. One concept that 
has not been sufficiently explored is with respect to the points at which the financial material of financial 
and non -financial ESG reporting intersect, and the expectations of the temporal nature of such 
intersections. While  some factors may have immediate meaning for financial investors, others may have 
implications indirectly over the long -term.  
The extent to which academic and industry analysis draws relationships is beyond the scope of this paper, 
yet some high level obs ervations merit consideration.  
917573664821
GRIIIRCSASBCDPTCFDCDSB
24    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  For decades, corporate governance issues have been liked to financial materiality, particularly as related 
to corporate governance processes, risk management, and executive financial incentives.  In the 1990s, 
the OECD had as sessed the importance of corporate governance for corporate performance, and 
developed OECD Principles for Corporate Governance.27 Following the energy and telecommunications 
company defaults in the early 2000s, attributed in part to weak corporate governan ce, institutional investors 
have dedicated additional focus to governance assessments, while rating agencies have been more 
transparent about how they assess governance and its impact on ratings.28 
Increasing awareness of the dire economic and financial con sequences of climate change are drawing 
attention to the link between firms’ management of climate risks and financial materiality. This is particularly 
the case as physical risks from climate change are expected to grow, as well as the risks from stranded  
assets to financial sector balance sheets. A growing body of research on the risks from climate change 
highlight channels by which they can affect economies, business, and financial sectors. These include the 
impact of physical risks from climate change r elated to storms, floods, fires, and negative spill over effects, 
such as to supply chains or financial markets. There is a growing expectation that climate -related factors 
will have an increasing influence over financial materiality, particularly in indus tries that are more exposed 
to stranded assets from declining demand for fossil fuels, and those exposed to the effects of physical 
risks.29 
There may be less evidence of immediate impacts of social factors, yet the long -term benefits can include 
better bra nd strength, customer loyalty, and staff retention, often associated with corporate social 
responsibility. Yet, institutional investors have often highlighted that the Social pillar is the most challenging 
to embed into assessments, in part because there i s little consensus as to what is considered material, 
and appropriate standards – such as with treatment of employees – various across countries.30 Yet, Covid -
19 has brought new attention to the importance of social factors on firms’ reputations and perform ance, 
and raises perspectives regarding the extent to which investors are transitioning to a multi -stakeholder 
stewardship model that may be more resilient to navigate unprecedented societal challenges.31 
Given these factors and developments, efforts are be ing made to map various elements of non -financial 
information, in terms of degrees of financial materiality.32 
 Frameworks and materiality  
SASB ’s approach to its ESG framework focuses on financial materiality, using an overall assessment 
which is applied to  each industry to determine the relative importance of each factor and subfactor 
depending on external environment and business model. When formulating accounting metrics, SASB 
considers the existing body of reporting standards and uses existing  metrics  where possible.33  This 
materiality approach has been influential in shaping the choice of key metrics and weighing of the metrics 
to determine ESG ratings for different industries. Notwithstanding this progress, discussions with ratings 
providers suggests th at there remains a wide range of perspectives on materiality of metrics.  
While other framework providers are less explicit about industry level metrics for materiality, several 
attempt to provide guidance as to which factors and indicators are of greater p riority, including in different 
sectors. Nevertheless, while the framework providers may provide useful guidance as to materials and 
even metric types that should be disclosed, they often do not provide further guidance on how these 
elements might become f inancially material to the industries. This leaves a significant amount of room for 
interpretation, which in turn has contributed to the rise of ESG ratings providers.  
 
   25 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  6. SASB m ateriality map 
 
Source: SASB website , provided for illustrative purposes.  
Climate specific materiality factors  
Environmental ratings are of particular concern, given that their use and relevance have only recently been 
considered on a global level.  
The TCFD  has led the development of both guidance on standards for climate -related disclosures, and 
also offers guidance on the use of such disclosure with respect to incorporation of climate scenario 
analysis. The Task Force was asked to develop voluntary, consistent climate - related financial d isclosures 
that would be useful to investors, lenders, and insurance underwriters in understanding material risks.34 
The TCFD provides guidance on the drivers of climate -related disclosures, with respect to risk and 
opportunities that have financial relevan ce for investors and other stakeholders. It has sought to align 
various climate and physical risks to various financial impacts to the income statement, cash flow statement 
and balance sheet. The TCFD identified several transition risks (including policy a nd legal, reputation, 
market and technology) and physical risks from the impact of climate change, such as storms, floods from 
rising sea levels, and wildfires.  
Of equal importance for ESG investors,  disclosure of  “opportunities” provides clear guidance regarding  
efficiencies that improve financial value from actions to identify and respond to environment -related risks. 
These include a host of ways in which issuers take advantage of opportunities with respect to more efficient 
uses of resources for their op erations (from recycling to reduced water use); more effective use of energy 
sources (lower emission sources, participation in carbon markets, etc.); development of products and 
services that facilitate lower emissions or climate adaptation solutions; asse ss to new markets; and, 
participation in renewable energy programs. Collectively, these factors can help increase revenues, lower 
financial and operating costs, improve competitive positioning and reputation, and improve capital 
availability, among other b enefits.  
 

26    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  7. TCFD m ateriality framework  
 
Source: Taskforce on Climate -related Financial Disclosures  
For these reasons, the Environment rating within ESG seek to explicitly capture  both the downside risks 
from carbon emissi ons, waste, and impact from climate change,  as well as how companies take advantage 
of such opportunities. It is, however, based on (i) assessment of external risks from climate change; (ii) 
risk management of issuer -specific resources to mitigate the effe cts of the climate change on the business 
operations and financial returns; and (iii)  efforts to  pursue opportunities to shift to enhancing revenues, 
profitability and/or capital use based on a shift to more climate -friendly activities or resource usage. 
Moreover, the TCFD p rovides stylis ed guidance on how these elements relate to transition risks to lower 
carbon emissions vs physical risks of climate change. While these steps can have a net positive impact on 
the environment, all else equal, it should be n oted that this does not explicitly measure an issuer ’s overall 
impact on the environment .35  
Diverging views of financial materiality  
Some consultants and institutional investors, noting the range of reporting efforts and standards by framers 
and providers , have issues approaches to distinguish between ESG reporting that is financ ially material 
for investors, relative to  types of reporting that are not material, although they may be a benefit to some 
stakeholders. For example, Russell Investments has develop ed a methodology that it asserts can 
differentiate between companies who score highly on ESG issues that are financially material to their 
business, from those who score highly on issues that are not financially material to their business36; in 
doing so it is able to enhance portfolio construction and investment performance.  Research from Khan, 
Serafeim and Yoon37, has addressed the matter creating a dataset focused on materiality for different 
industries and found that firms with a good rating in material is sues outperform those with a low rating.  The 
purpose of highlighting this effort is merely to show that the investment community may not have sufficient 
comfort with the current state of ESG disclosure and scoring, such that analytical efforts are being ma de 
to extract information of materially -relevant financial value for those investors who wish to improve absolute 
and risk adjusted returns.   
Various international bodies have called for improved consistency and meaningfulness of ESG disclosures 
so that th e links to materiality and sustainability are clear and consistent. In 2018 , the UN PRI and ICGN 
found that while there is not  one set of metrics or a single framework that could satisfy all users of ESG 

   27 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  data, given the heterogeneity of users, there is roo m for companies to disclose standardised ESG 
information at a basic level to complement more customised ESG reporting improve the consistency of 
data items. 38 The paper also suggested that investors and companies need to think more about systemic 
issues, in cluding the FSB Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures39 (TCFD) 
recommendations, the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and their links to individual companies.  
Also, in 2019, the World Economic Forum published an assessment of ESG reporti ng, which noted the 
desire among investors and corporates to address challenges related to meaningful and consistent 
disclosures.40 Key areas to address include (i) the complexity and burden of ESG reporting; (ii) the 
incomparability of company ESG data  due to the specifics of their industry, their location and other factors, 
and application of company -specific classifications , which  often renders data incomparable; (iii) poor 
understanding of and interaction with ESG ratings agencies, including a distinct l ack of transparency —and 
difficulty in obtaining clarity  on what ESG ratings assess.  
ESG scoring results and performance  
Even though the users of ESG information largely retrieve information from the issuers’ disclosures, and 
developing analysis and scores  largely the same base of information, ESG scores from major ratings 
providers (for which data is commercially available) can vary greatly from one ESG provider to another.41 
The ESG scoring suffers from some level of criticism because different methodologi es can lead to wide 
variance in results for individual issuers. This implies that if investors are using and relying on different 
service providers, the score inputs that shape securities selection and weighting could be driven by choice 
of rating provider . Put differently, two funds that are both high -ESG market portfolios could have radically 
different exposures, which in turn calls into question the meaning of the entire process.  
This section assesses the extent to which ESG scores of major providers dif fer, and also how they compare 
to the dispersion of credit ratings across firms.  
ESG vs credit ratings score comparison  
The metrics used by companies and data providers are affected by the lack of consistency and different 
levels of transparency. Among the  major market data providers such as Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, 
FTSE, MSCI and Sustainalytics, the methodologies are quite different. While variation in analytical 
practices and judgment can bring additional insights to investors, the correlation among th e scores they 
assign to the same companies is low.  
State Street Global Advisors sought to assess the extent of this rating variation across major ESG ratings 
providers.42 As of 2016, there were more than 125 ESG data providers, according to the Global Init iative 
for Sustainability Ratings, and they generally developed their own sourcing, research, and scoring 
methodologies. As a result, ratings for issuers vary widely depending on the provider that is chosen. In its 
assessment, SSGA found that the R^2 betwe en the ratings of Sustainalytics and MSCI, m MSCI and 
RobecoSAM, and MSCI and Bloomberg were roughly 0.5, while some others were higher.  
Table  4. SSGA Assessment of R^2 of ESG ratings among major score providers  
 Sustainalytics  MSCI  RobecoSAM  Bloomberg ESG  
Sustainalytics  1 .53 .76 .66 
MSCI   1 .48 .47 
RobecoSAM    1 .68 
Bloomberg ESG     1 
Source: State Street Global Advisors (2019)  
28    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  The OECD assessed different rating providers (Bloomberg, MSCI and Refinitiv) in order to understand 
how their rating vary when analysing specific indices, such as the S&P500 and the STOXX 600. The 
analysis showed wide differences, with an average R^2 of 0. 21 for the S&P500 and of 0.18 for the STOXX 
600. The analysis of the  ratings refers to  the co mponent companies of each index and looking at the 
correlation of different ratings on each constituent, so the result is the average of three two -way correlations  
for each components.  
Figure  8. S&P 500 ESG ratings correlation for different providers, 2019  
 
Note:  Providers’ names in the legend correspond to the Y axis when at the left and to the X axis when at the right (e.g.: Bloomberg -MSCI; 
Bloomberg = Y axis, MSCI = X axis).  
Source: Bloomberg, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD Staff calculations  
Figure  9. STOXX 600 ESG ratings correlation for different providers, 2019  
 
Note:  Providers’ names in the legend correspond to the Y axis when at the left and to the X axis when at the right  (e.g.: Bloomberg -MSCI; 
Bloomberg = Y axis, MSCI = X axis).  
Source: Bloomberg, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD Staff calculations  

   29 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  This highlights how some companies, ranked top by one provider, have much lower scores by others. This 
depends on what metrics are included in measure ments, how factors are weighed in the pillar s cores, 
qualitative judgment of analysts , and how the measurement is affected by  company  disclosure.43 Research 
by Berg et Al.  (2019), investigates the divergence of environmental,  social, and governance (ESG) ratings  
of five providers . It decomposes the dif ference among ratings into three sources and finds that different 
scopes for ESG ratings among providers have a higher impact regarding the different assessment of ESG 
categories, explaining more than 50% of results.  The remaining differences are explained  by weighting 
and measurement differences. This assessment substantiates concerns over the meaning of the current 
ESG scores and their value to investors.  
OECD staff compared ESG ratings with a selection of issuer credit ratings by major providers and foun d 
that while ESG scores vary widely, credit scores of individual issuers are much less divergent. These 
differences raise important questions about reliance on any one rating to make investment decisions, 
including for structuring investment portfolios tha t are considered to have a tilt toward higher ESG scores. 
In short, if high ESG scores of firms are largely dependent on the methodologies of providers (either ESG 
raters or portfolio managers themselves), the extent to which end -investors can be assured t hat ESG 
investing provided enhanced returns or aligns with any particular societal values is dubious. This market 
dilemma merits further scrutiny by policy makers and the investment community.  
Figure  10. ESG ratings and issuer credit ratings, 2019  
 
Note: Sample of public companies sele cted by largest market capitalis ation as to represent different industries in the United States. The issuer 
credit ratings are transformed using a projection to the scale from 0 to 20, where 0 represents the lowest rating (C/D) and 20 the highest rating 
(Aaa/AAA).  
Source: Refinitiv, Bloomberg, MSCI, Yahoo finance, Moody’s, Fitch, S&P; OECD calculations  
ESG score d ifferences -- assessment of ratings approaches  
Wide differences in ratings can occu r for a number of reasons. They may relate to different frameworks, 
measures, key indicators and metrics, data use, qualitative judgement. Also, they can be influenced by 
weighting of subcategories and reweighting of scores to ensure “best in class” in ind ustries. While different 
0102030405060708090100ESG Rating
Provider 1 Provider 2 Provider 3 Provider 4 Provider 5
Basic Materials: Ecolab 
Cons. Cyclicals: Amazon
Cons. Non -Cyc.: Walmart
Energy: Exxon Mobil  
Financials: Berkshire H. 
Healthcare: Johnson& J. 
Industrials: Boeing 
Technology: Microsoft
Teleco: Verizon 
Utilities: Nextera Energy 
02468101214161820Issuer Credit Rating
Moody's Fitch S&P
30    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG methodologies, judgement and data are welcome developments to enrich the information disclosure 
to investors, large differences in ESG ratings across providers may reduce the meaning of ESG portfolios 
that weight better -rated f irms more highly. As such, a review of the methodologies of certain ESG ratings 
providers that are well -utilised by the investment industry can help shed light on the causes of these 
differences. Drawing attention to such differences could help investors u nderstand that additional due 
diligence may be needed when utilising third -party ESG ratings to understand these factors that contribute 
to different outcomes.  
A review of the publicly available approaches and data use of Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Sustai nalytics 
and MSCI illustrates a number of factors that may contribute to differences in ratings.44 They include: 
framework, factor categories, subcategory metrics, measurement of controversies, judgement, indicator 
weightings, and ESG weightings within indu stries were “best in class” is desired. Moreover, such choices 
could affect alignment of ratings with financial materiality, which might suggest why indices reliant on 
certain ratings perform better than others.  The purpose of this assessment is not to dr aw attention to the 
practices of these specific rating methodologies, but rather to provide comparisons and examples that are 
likely to be prevalent across the industry, and which may help the reader better assess practices among 
ratings providers and asse t managers.  
 Frameworks.  The ratings providers use similar high -level frameworks in that they focus on ESG 
pillars and include a range of categories and even more subcategory metrics that are data -driven, 
and weighted to derive category and pillar outputs. Each uses some form of identification of a risk, 
and how management seeks to address the risk. There is more differentiation as to how each rater 
incorporates benefits to revenues from opportunities. Also, a key difference is the extent to which 
the framew orks formally measure “controversies” to environmental, social, and governance issues 
that suggest management is not well prepared (e.g. does not have the right risk management and 
oversight mechanisms in place) to navigate and address societal issues that  result in controversies. 
Perhaps the one additional difference is that Sustainalytics has “building blocks” that begin with 
Corporate Governance, consider material ESG issuers, and then scan for idiosyncratic ESG 
issues. It then uses betas that are a core  part of the ESG rating, by embedding the effects of events 
on financials into the process.  
 Focus on financial materiality.   The rating firms’ alignment of scoring with financial materiality, 
evidenced by explicit use or pri oritis ation of subcategories or metrics, varies.  For example , MSCI  
ESG ratings are based on a proprietary model that identifies relevant ESG key issues on an 
industry by  industry basis, SASB  created a specific set of  metrics for financial materiality, while 
Sustainalytics notes that it u ses GRI G4 materiality metrics. However, the GRI materiality metrics 
are derived from factors that are considered to be frequently raised by stakeholders, and having 
significant economic, environmental, and social impact.45 Also, the extent to which raters consider 
externalities (e.g. pollution) as financially material relative to risk management of external climate 
risks (e.g. risk management of firm assets to guard against the effects of climate change) will impact 
results. This also relates to the expecta tion of the timing of financial materiality; climate risk 
management of the growing wildfires (such as in California) may have a more near -term impact on 
financial material than carbon footprint and intensity, which in aggregate will have growing negative 
macroeconomic consequences that spill back to firms over the medium to long -term.  
 Incorporation of controversies.  Several providers have formal mechanisms in place to track and 
measure controversies, which are events that cause reputational damage and high light a firm’s 
lack of preparedness and/or inability to manage emerging events and risks. In some cases, the 
controversies are part of the ESG rating, and in others it is a standalone rating that sits next to the 
pillars, contributing to a blending total E SG score (e.g. the score is not simply a weighted average 
of the individual E, S, and G scores).  
 Factor categories and subcategories.  The factor categories in each of the E, S, and G pillars 
appear to show some differences in terms of topics and numbers. S everal key areas appear to 
   31 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  have differences: the number and type of categories may appear fairly similar and, in concept, this 
would not necessarily lead to substantial difference in ESG ratings if underlying data trends and 
weightings were aligned across providers. However, pillar subcategories that determine metrics 
and weighting show much wider ranges of differences, which indicates that such differences are a 
key contributor to the variance in scoring outcomes. As an example, MSCI has ten categories tha t 
include key environmental and social externalities, risks and opportunities, and 37 distinct 
subcategories that are focused issues from which one or more metrics are derived. Sustainalytics 
has over 42 subcategories on similar issues with some difference s (e.g. EMS certification, eco 
design). By contrast, Thomson Reuters has 10 categories of a somewhat similar nature to MSCI, 
186 metrics and over 400 data points.  
 Indicators.  Subcategory indicators appear to differ considerably, in terms of number of indic ators, 
choice of specific indicators, and their weights. Several ratings providers make use of specific ESG 
framework providers’ indicators, such as GRI, SASB, and TCFD. While they make reference to 
subsets of these indicators, and often include a mix of t hese and other indicators in each of the 
pillars, the level of consistency of metric inputs is not clear. Also, metrics are chosen to some 
degree based on data availability, to ensure that the ratings providers are able to measure each 
indicator accurately  over time. Also, these indicators can range significantly by industry, to take 
into account materiality, including financial materiality, so the weights of subcategory metrics that 
drive results may differ. Yet, the drivers of scores by industry are not m ade transparent to users of 
ESG scores.  
 Qualitative expert judgment.  The use of qualitative expert judgment either to derive an indicator 
or as a layer of consideration over a set of indicators is a factor that influences the outcomes, and 
may contribute t o distinct ratings differences across the major rating providers. Several rating firms 
make explicit reference to the use of judgment, particularly from reading company, industry and 
NGO reports about industry developments, to help shape determinations of what is material in 
each industry.  This judgment also appears to be particularly pertinent to the weighting of indicators, 
explained hereafter.  
 Indicator weightings and ESG weightings within industries.  Metric weighting comes in several 
forms. Expert judgment is used to weight these various inputs. In some cases, expert judgment 
appears to be used to factor these and other inputs into a score, and in other cases, the 
mechanisms are transparency and data driven, such that the category score is derived 
quantitatively. For example, several raters (e.g. Thomson Reuters and Sustainalytics) provide a 
high level of transparency on the specific weights of a number of indicators that drive category and 
pillar scor es. MSCI notes that judgment about key issues determines weighing by industry, based 
in part on timeframe (short -long) and contribution of risk to determine impact to financial 
performance.  
 Transforming ratings into indices . Once ratings have been establis hed, several of the providers 
then develop indices that are used by institutional investors and providers of retail fund and ETF 
products. The additional steps to develop indices often include, at a minimum: exclusion (or 
negative screening) and rebalancin g based on ESG scores. The choice of exclusion depends on 
different factors, among others on threshold typically driven by clients tolerance and by the index 
provider judgment of what is considered too be negative from a societal perspective, which could 
vary by country and region. Industries that are often subject to forms of exclusion include: alcohol, 
fossil fuels (especially coal), fur, gambling, nuclear, pornography, tobacco and weapons.  As such, 
screening can have a heavy impact on portfolio composit ion and investment results, and drives the 
indices’ tracking errors relative to traditional market -wide portfolios. The extent of portfolio 
reweighting toward higher ESG scores will depend on, at least: (i) the extent to which the rater 
realigns best in cl ass by industry, such that even companies with lower raw ESG scores will be 
reweighted higher to compensate for exclusions in particular industries; (ii) the extent to which they 
tilt toward higher ESG, (iii) the ESG scores. In this respect, a provider tha t has more assertively 
32    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  excluded, allows for a stronger tilt, and has scores of companies with large market caps that differ 
from peer rater scores could yield an index with considerably different weights than traditional 
indices.  
ESG funds – investment app roaches and strategies  
Investment approaches  
ESG investment approaches tend to conform to at least six distinct forms, depending on the 
comprehensiveness through which the asset manager seeks to utili se the ESG framework.  Different bodies 
provide a categor isation of the sustainable investment strategies, among which are  the OECD, the Global 
Sustainable Investment Alliance and the CFA Institute.  On one side, the least amount of complexity is 
through excluding certain firms categorically (e.g. moral consi derations), and on the other side is full ESG 
integration into the very firm culture of investing, such that it becomes an integrate part of the investment 
processes, governance and decisions.  The approaches are not mutually exclusive and portfolios could 
simultaneously apply more than one.  
The first form is “exclusion” or “avoidance” which signifies exclusion of corporates and governments whose 
behaviours do not align with basic societal values. Causes for exclusion include, but are not limited to:  
 manufa cturing controversial weapons;  
 activities that are not aligned with ethical standards, such as tobacco, alcohol and casinos;  
 violation of global compact principles;46 
 companies with more than a certain percentage of revenues from coal extraction  or activities with 
a negative impact on social values.  
A second category  is “norms -based” or “inclusionary screening” which pursues the inclusion or higher 
representation of issuers that are compliant with international norms, such as those by the OECD an d 
UN.47 This can include “best in class”  investing whereby firms achieving above certain ESG score 
thresholds are included.  
The third form, which in many cases is a step following inclusion , is the realignment of the remaining assets 
by ESG scores, with more tilt of portfolio exposures  toward issuers with higher ESG  and away from 
lower ESG scores. Funds can chose to align with an ESG -tilted index for passive investing, or engage in 
active investment through a selected approach relative to an index , to tilt m ore heavily or where the portfolio 
manager believes additional value will be created . This is particularly the case where the asset manager 
has a proprietary ESG research approach and engages in additional quantitative and qualitative 
assessment that offer s either different perspectives on the current ESG ranking of firms, or some insight 
into the momentum.  
The fourth  form is the pursuit of ESG thematic focuses  within at least one of the environmental, social or 
governance areas.  Thematic strategies can be mostly financially -driven or values -driven  These types of 
funds may or may not exclude or rebalance  portfolios based only on ESG scores, but rather may focus on 
particular pillar scores and underlying metrics, such as with the E score and carbon footprint or intensity . 
Such thematic funds may be aligned with certain social standards. It is in this form that the financial and 
social investing objectives can be blurred, as the theme often has a purpose that is distinct from maximising 
long-term financial valu e. 
Furthermore, funds could employ an impact focus . This category lends itself to ambiguity because impact 
investors often pursue social impact. While ESG impact investors may appear to be similar to the social 
impact investing, the key difference is that ESG impact funds should seek to achieve outcomes f or the 
benefit of financial returns, in the process of improving ESG practices. Improving financial performance of 
   33 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  issuers could occur in part through active engagement by ESG impact investors that contribute to 
improvements in governance or climate risk m anagement practices, or divesting from ethically undesirable 
subsidiaries, which in turn can improve market valuations and financial performance. In this respect, ESG 
investing could include  investing in lower  scoring  ESG companies  that show some propensit y to transition 
to higher ESG, and/or where the fund engages in some form of shareholder activism through share voting 
or bilateral communications to change company behaviour and practices . This approach can be 
generalised across ESG, or could be thematic in focus, where fund managers may have expertise in one 
area of ESG, such as green finance or good governance.  For example, ESG impact investing could seek 
to maximise financial returns through green finance bonds.  
Lastly, ESG integration,  which refers to  systematic and explicit inclusion of ESG risks and opportunities 
in all key aspects of an institutional investors’ investment process . Unlike the best -in-class method, ESG 
integration does not neces sarily require peer group benchmarking or overweighting (underweighting) the 
leaders (laggards)  because ESG factors are assessed during the asset selection, portfolio balancing and 
risk management processes. S igns of ESG integration often include dedicated governance to oversee 
ESG integration; substantial  resources given to the assessment of ESG considerations  within portfolio 
management teams ; explicit exclusion policies to avoid certain companies with very low scores and 
engagement policies to improve impact for those with relatively low scores but opportunit ies for 
improvement; and quantitative research and tools to assess performance.  
Table  5. ESG sustainability investment styles  
 Screened exclusion  or 
norms  ESG rebalancing  Thematic Focus  Impact  
Objective  Remove specific 
companies w/  
objectionable activities  Invest based on ESG 
scores and rating systems  Invest with focus on 
particular E, S, or G 
issues.  Target specific non -
financial outcomes along 
with financial returns.  
Key considerations  Definition / financial impact 
on screens.  ESG data sources, desired 
risk taken.  Broad vs specific 
exposures.  Report on progress of 
impact outcomes.  
Examples  Screening out producers of 
weapons, fossil fuels, etc. , 
or screening in those who 
comply with agreed 
international norms.  Optimis e ESG 
benchma rks, active 
strategies, etc.  Environmental focus on 
low-emissions.  Specific green bond 
mandates.  
Source: Staff explanations a dapted from BlackRock Investment Institute and BlackRock Sustainability Investing , McKinsey and CFA Institute.  
The employment of t hese ap proaches may vary depending upon whether the entity implementing the 
approach is a fund manager, which caters to retail investors, or an institutional asset owners. This may 
include consideration of timeframes for engagements, as open -ended investme nt funds’ engagement 
depends on the confidence of their ability to generate superior, or at least sufficient, returns on their 
strategy.  
Investment strategies  
Within these rebalancing and thematic approaches, ESG can be used to pursue certain strategies . The 
forms of ESG strategies vary as widely as such strategies do for traditional forms of financing.  
There are various  strategies used  to capture value by inefficiencies in the current discord in ESG ratings.  
One strategy is  ESG momentum , which seeks to in vest in issuers who show signs of materially improving 
their ESG scores in the future. In this regard , impact investing can be utilis ed to help facilitate the benefits 
from momentum strategies by actively engaging with corporate executives to facilitate po sitive changes 
that improve ESG scores. Also, some papers suggest that blended strategies, where by ESG and 
fundamental investment frameworks are integrated, can help achieve superior risk -adjusted returns. Also, 
34    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  building on ESG exclusion, some forms of al ternative funds have begun shorting strategies  to short what 
they consider to be unethical issuers, and leverage their investments in higher scoring ESG issuers.  
A similar approach is  alpha investing, which can be achieved through additional selection base d on the 
asset mangers’ own proprietary approach to assessing quantitative and qualitative factors can lead to 
superior returns. This form of investing moves toward the holistic ESG integration, in which asset managers 
use all quantitative and qualitative information at their disposal related to fundamentals, market technical, 
ESG, and other areas of judgment such as with respect to macro cycles and stress testing of downside 
risks to develop optimal portfolio positioning . 
Traditional factor strategies  seek to invest based on factors that are quantitatively derived to exploit 
systemically relevant risk factors. Some strategies combine factor investing with forms of ESG approaches 
such as exclusion and tilting. For example, t he EURO iSTOXX ESG -X & Ex Nuc lear Power Multi Factor 
Index is constructed with standardis ed ESG exclusion screens applied for Global Compact Principles, 
Controversial Weapons, Thermal Coal, Nuclear Power and Tobacco Producers.  
Carbon transition strategies are gaining momentum with gre ater investor demand for funds that anticipate 
greater downside risks and loss of valuation in stranded assets associated with high -carbon intensity. 
Asset managers are development funds that are much less exposed to industries that are expected to be 
directly affected by stranded assets, and more exposed to upside opportunities from new and green 
technologies, such as renewable energy, that can benefit from this transition.  
Also, ESG strategies appear to need particular tailoring in emerging markets,  in pa rt because the current 
ESG data infrastructure and, at times, willingness to disclose has hampered ESG incorporation in indices. 
As a result, there is some criticism that the global indices’ weighting on high ESG scores alone penalis es 
issuers that are sta rting from a much lower based. As well, even lower rated issuers which are making 
strides to improve ESG rates face underrepresentation on indices. Thus, alpha investing in emerging 
markets is particularly relevant where investment in emerging good practic es can help reduce risks.48  
Sustainable development goals (SDG) investing is gaining increasing attention, as a portion of socially 
responsible investors seek to better align their ESG investing approaches with global sustainability, as it 
relates to the U N sustainable development. To this end, the OECD collaborated with MSCI to develop a 
joint research paper “Institutional Investing for the SDGs ” which is aimed at facilitating a discussion among 
market participants and stakeholders about the role of instit utional investors in implementing UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) into their strategies.  
Within these approaches, there may be some ambiguity to the end investor who may be investing to 
achieve both social impact and financial returns. The asset m anagers’ choice of strategy can, explicitly or 
implicitly, determine whether it seems that only exclusion provides clear guidance to the end -investor as 
to the impact. Thereafter, it may be less certain of the investors’ resources are being invested to rew ard 
companies that are disclosing more risks, and better managing risks.  
Hedge funds are also increasingly engaged in ESG investing, and their strategies vary widely. A surveys 
conducted by Cerulli and UNPRI indicate that equity long/short is the strategy where most respondents (46%) 
currently incorporate responsible investing criteria and plan to do so in two years (65%).49 The use of ESG 
investing, and apparently the desire to gain from alpha investing and leverage, is gaining momentum. 
BarclayHedge found in a survey of hedge fund managers and commodity trading advisors that almost 60% 
of hedge fund assets will be tied to ESG criteria in 2019, rising from 42% last year. Governance was cited as 
by far the most important ESG factor, weighed for short bets as well as long positions.  
   35 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  11. Fund managers ’ incorporation of hedge fund strategies for ESG investing  
 
Note:  “Other”:  Includes credit funds and answers depicting incorporation across all hedge fund strategies.  
Source: Cerulli  Associates in association with UN -supported Principles for Responsible Investment.  
Fund performance  
 Given different forms of asset scoring and performance, ratings providers have begun to provide scoring 
and ranking of funds based on ESG, irrespective of  whether the funds profess to follow an ESG approach 
or not. Recent evidence from Morningstar, which provides such ratings, suggests that there is little 
evidence that choosing funds with “high sustainability” provides better return than other types of fun ds. 
This, in part, may reflect the fact that high sustainability funds, like all funds, incorporate myriad strategies 
which result in a wide range of outcomes.  
Fund performance associated with ESG varies considerably, depending on the scores used and the 
analytical approaches employed. OECD staff analysis in Section 8 suggests no correlation between funds 
ESG score categories, based on the average ESG scores of held assets. However, the Secretariat’s 
assessment did not have sufficiently granular data to ass ess performance by investment strategy. In this 
respect, recent industry assessments suggest that at least certain ESG funds perform relatively better by 
underweighting rather than entirely removing issuers whose practices are not aligned with societal ESG  
values; and, giving higher weights to companies in the same industries, aligned with relatively higher ESG 
scores. For example, coal producers might be excluded from socially responsible investment funds, but 
certain coal producers that have sound governa nce and social practices could be included and even have 
a material weight within the industry segment of the portfolio.  
Tilting and exclusion policies may not align with investors’ perceptions of portfolio composition. A study in 
2017 noted that the top 20% highest -scoring companies in the energy universe have an average ESG 
score of about 77, well above the average score of 56 for the MSCI World Index , and the average score 
of the top 20% in the tobacco universe was also above the MSCI World average.50 A second issue is that 
a fund’s sustainability score, and therefore its ranking, is often determined relative to other funds in its peer 
group. For example, a renewable energy fund could have a low or below -average sustainability score 
relative to other rene wable energy funds, while a traditional energy fund might score above average or 
high relative to other traditional energy funds. Consequently, the renewable fund in this example could 
have a lower ranking than the traditional energy fund simply because of  the peer groups against which 
they are measured.51 
5%3%5%14%14%11%8%14%22%19%19%46%
8%11%14%19%24%22%22%27%27%32%35%65%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%Volatility arbitrageConvertible bond…Fixed-income arbitrageManaged futuresEvent drivenGlobal macroRelative valueAlternative risk premiaOtherMultistrategyEquity market neutralEquity long/shortNext 12-24 months Today
36    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG performance  
 Academic and industry studies vary considerably with respect to the performance and performance 
attributes of ESG investing. Some finance industry studies suggest that while methodologies  may differ, 
ESG financial performance appears to be in line or superior to that of traditional indices. Even though the 
ESG index providers use different methods and often given unequal scores within  factor -specific scores, 
JPMorgan still finds a high deg ree of overlap when considering the impact on aggregate price returns.52 It 
looked at yearly returns of MSCI World Benchmark Index and MSCI World ESG, and found net returns 
were very much in line with each other. These recent studies are also supported by s ome academic 
studies, though evidence is mixed. Some academic studies that find a positive link suggest that firms with 
better ESG disclosures have better risk management frameworks, and that more disclosure can create 
better reputational management, which  has intrinsic value.  
More analysis is warranted in this area to assess the extent to which different methodologies can, in some 
cases, lead to different financial performance and risk outcomes, and the extent to which subjective factors 
would contribute t o return differentials.  
Assessment of factors  
Most of the industry studies consider returns over the past ten or so years suggested some biases that 
contributed to results. The first bias is that this period corresponds to very high monetary policy 
accommo dation, which in turn affected asset prices. While it is difficult to say if the policy environment 
affected higher ESG scoring firms relative to the total investment universe, one might infer that of ESG 
“beneficiaries,” the monetary environment could hav e further contributed to exuberance.  
The second bias , which may have some relation, is that firms which tended to provide more robust ESG 
disclosures were larger on average, and perhaps more able to allocate resources needed to provide 
analysis and disclo sures of ESG. Size was determined to have a bearing on ESG scores. This might 
suggest that ability to assess and report risks, irrespective of steps to impact change through sustainability 
opportunities, contributes to the positive scores.  
The third bias  is that, due to growing interest in ESG, there has been greater inflows into securities of firms 
with higher ESG ratings. While there has been some concern in this area, the research by JPMorgan tries 
to control for this factor and finds that from 2014 -2017 , higher ESG stocks generated much higher ROE 
than low -rated ESG stocks. Nevertheless, there does appear to be evidence that the market valuations of 
higher -rated ESG stocks have increased relative to lower rated ones, which is contributing to improved 
valuations. This has occurred during a period of sharp increases in ESG funds. As such, some of the 
concern that highly -rated ESG stocks may be overvalued has merit.  
The fourth bias  is that the choice of ratings inputs – e.g. between MSCI, Sustainalytics, or a proprietary 
firm approach layered onto third party ratings, contributes to different results. Given the lack of disclosure 
over these judgment -based elements of the methodologies, it is often difficult to determine specific 
qualitative drivers of these r atings.  
A series of issues surrounding these scores may lead investors to have reservations with respect to  
meaningfulness  for financial and even ethical investing. A lack of standardis ation in reporting, diverse ways 
to measure and communicate key aspects  for each industry,  and the application of non -comparable 
methodologies by different providers are only some of the characteristics that drive the need to investigate 
more deeply on these scores. ESG ratings are definitely useful to ols that can be used to summaris e a 
complex topic such as sustainability, but the current challenges  risk undermining the aspirational benefits, 
and could risk erosion of market integrity in the process . And with the growth in popularity of these 
standards, many asset managers ar e using ESG ratings as key determinants of their decisions. This can 
be over simplistic and may not return the desired results.53 
   37 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Literature review about “responsible investing” (ESG and others) performance  
A considerable a mount of research has been conducted over the past several decades with respect to 
socially responsible and sustainable investing, including the impact of corporate social responsibility and 
good governance on market -based and financial statement measures of financial performance. These 
studies, while analysing in a comprehensive manner Corporate Social Responsibility, do not directly relate 
to ESG ratings and their impact on shareholders returns.  
In recent years, the financial industry has turned its atte ntion on the extent to which ESG investing can 
achieve superior returns, or at least avoid inferior returns, relative to traditional investing that does not 
incorporate sustainability considerations beyond immediate financial performance and corporate stra tegy 
to further enhance future performance. It has pursued several forms of analysis: (i) academic studies of 
performance using ESG or other related sustainability metrics; (ii) financial industry studies using 
established ESG ratings; (iii) megastudies th at assess various forms of prior studies of corporate social 
responsibility and good governance, and impact on performance.  
We assess selected existing studies in order to gain from studies focusing on ESG investing using ratings, 
and to differentiate from  mega -studies that are too broad, in our view, to shed light on ESG investing 
distinct from a wide range of measurements loosely defined as socially responsible investing.  
Early literature on social responsible investing and financial performance  
Early res earch on responsible investing focuses on how financial performance was affected by an increase 
in the level of Social Responsibility. The lack of specific instruments, such as ESG ratings, created the 
problem of which measures better represented the Socia l Responsibility of enterprises analysed.  
 (Alexander and Buchholz, 1978 [1]), analyses the return of the stock market of social responsible stocks 
using a CAPM model. He finds no significant relationship between the two. Different studies, using different 
methodologies, such as (Cochran and Wood, 1984 [2]), (Aupperle, Carroll and Hatfield, 1985 [3]) and 
(Blackburn, Doran and Shrader, 1994 [4]), support the findings, show ing similar results. The differences in 
methodology did not seem to affect the overall finding of a non -correlation of the CSR and the performance.  
Of the findings mentioned, the research carried out in 1984 focuses specifically on corporate measures of 
performances. Even in this case the results bear a weak relation between CSR and corporate 
performances. Following the study,  (Aupperle, Carroll and Hatfield, 1985 [3]), undertake an empirical 
investiga tion between CSR and Profitability of enterprises, using risk -adjusted measures as well as 
profitability ratios. The findings show, again, a lack of relationship between the two.  
Further literature seeks to address the effects of the negative screening inv esting approach. Research has 
addressed the importance of social investing, while showing how performances were hurt. In particular, 
one research from  (Kacperczyk and Hong, 2006 [5]) shows how "sin" sto cks, publicly -traded companies 
involved in controversial productions, are less held by certain institutions, due to a negative screening 
approach, and this abstention involves a cost for investors. These sin stocks have the possibility to Critique and empirical assessment  
38    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  outperform the ma rket due to a mispricing given by the fact that they are less held, not for an economic 
reason, but due to negative screening approaches54.  
 (Gorgen, Nerlinger and Wilkens, 2017 [6]) investigate the carb on risk and equity price relationship. They 
use different providers’ data on measures of carbon emissions and they find that high carbon risk is 
associated with higher returns, even though increases in brown risk lowers future returns, for different time 
periods and geographic areas.  
Meta -studies on corporate social responsibility  
Broader research does not focus on ESG ratings to understand how they affect performance but instead 
it looks at different sustainability metrics from different sources. This way  of approaching sustainability 
issues allows for a more comprehensive perspective, but does not allow research to be compared properly, 
given the different nature and lack of standardisation of various metrics.  
Three different studies by (Orlitzky, Schmidt and Rynes, 2003 [7]), (Margolis, Elfenbein and Walsh, 2009 [8]) 
and (Wang, Dou and Jia, 2016 [9]) were carried out  to provide a comprehensive meta -analysis of the 
relationship between Corporate Social Responsibility and Corporate Financial Performance. The three 
studies analyse more than 40 researches each in order to understand if an association was present. All 
three point to a positive association between Corporate Social Responsibility and Corporate Financial 
Performance. The main issue we want to point out is the selection of previous studies on the topic of 
Corporate Social Responsibility and  how this was linked to financial performances of companies. Some of 
the studies were selected through a keyword search and selection. This methodology, although useful to 
identify researches looking at sustainability, has some weaknesses that could have a  meaning impact on 
the results. In particular, the screening will have to be done on a predefined database and the resulting 
sample might be biased and exclude important results, or worse, include results that are insignificant to 
the research.  
Industry pr ofessionals provide similar methodologies. Among the most prominent studies, (Friede, Busch 
and Bassen, 2015 [10]) provide a broad assessment of over 2200 previous academic studies. The 
methodology extracts academic researches (regardless if they are working papers, published journal 
papers, or written for a commercial audience) from the main publisher and scholar dat abases, based on 
specific keywords relating to ESG such as “Environmental”, “Social” and “Governance” but also more broad 
ones such as “responsibility” and “sustainability”. After this first screening a further filter is applied using 
the keywords “meta, r eview, literature, overview, analysis, study/ies, and examination” The resulting 
sample is a mix of studies focusing on different pillars and on Corporate Social Responsibility, instead of 
being solely focused on ESG ratings.  
 The results show that 90% of studies find a nonnegative ESG –Corporate Financial Performance relation, 
with the majority of them reporting positive findings. Contrarily to the previously introduced meta -studies, 
which focused only on Corporate Social Responsibility, it questionably cla ims to focus on ESG, and its link 
to Corporate Financial Performances. Our critique is moved by the fact that little attention was posed in 
differentiating between ESG and CSR, while including researches that were mainly focused on the latter. 
These resear ch results, as insightful as they are with respect to CSR and corporate financial performance, 
do not provide conclusions that directly relate to ESG ratings or investing.  
Literature focused on ESG performance  
When focusing on literature regarding ESG rat ings and ESG investing we find different results than 
research on the CSR -Corporate Financial Performance association. We observe that studies that focus on 
ESG investment strategies, such as negative screening and Best -In-Class selection, find a different  effect 
on the portfolio returns of investors applying these strategies. In some cases, portfolios that do not invest 
in ESG perform better than portfolio integrating ESG scores. Therefore, in this section we provide a 
   39 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  comprehensive review of industry and academic research analysing ESG data in order to understand how 
it affects performances and returns.  
Industry research, either directly from investment firms or sell -side analysts, or in partnership with 
academia, often showed some positive results in term s of aspects of market or financial performance. For 
example, research conducted by the industry, such as  “ESG from A to Z: a global primer ” (Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch, 2019 [11]) and “ESG Investing” (J.P. Morgan, 2016 [12]) among others provide a positive 
correlation between ESG and performance, while academic research generally shows a negative 
correlation. This could depend on the provider of the ESG scores, timing, strategy and different factor s 
affecting the research.  
Given the differences of ESG scores among different providers, we try to understand what these depend 
on and how this affects performances.  (Berg, Kölbel and Rigobon, 2019 [13]) provide an answer to this 
question, with an overview of how and why ESG ratings vary among providers. The research suggests 
that ratings vary due to scope, weight and measurement divergence. The latter, explains more than 50% 
of ESG differences. These dif ferences in metrics measurement makes it difficult for investors to identify 
outperformers and laggards.  
These findings can be complemented by the concept of materiality and how it is perceived, since it has a 
strong impact on which metrics are reported an d how they are reported. (Khan, Serafeim and Yoon, 
2015 [14]), develop a dataset of sustainable investments classified as material for each industry. The results 
show that firms with strong ratings on material sustainability issues have better future performance than 
firms with inferior ratings on the same issues. This would explain the differences in ESG ratings by 
providers, as there is wide disagreement on materiality and how to measure it.  
In this r egards it is important to understand how ESG rating disagreement affects stock returns. Therefore, 
(Gibson et  al., 2019 [15]), examine a sample of S&P500 companies in order to empirically prove their 
hypothesis. What they find is a negative correlation between ESG ratings dispersion and stock returns, 
meaning that higher disagreement among providers results in overvaluation of stocks, and therefore lower 
overall returns.  
Regarding performance, it is bene ficial to review both industry and academic literature covering ESG 
applications. Research  from MSCI, an investment research firm, assesses the foundations of ESG 
investing, divided in four different papers .55 They seek  to answer how ESG affects equity valu ation, risk 
and performances, how to integrate them into benchmarks and into passive and ac tive portfolios. The 
research papers  provide an insightful view on the different topics mentioned. The first research finds a 
positive link between ESG and Corporate  Financial Performance  while the second provides an equity 
analysis of ESG funds in the form of exclusion and tilting. Results showed that exclusion generally 
increased overall risk, but this was offset by a positive impact on risk -adjusted returns due to ESG 
integration. Overall, ESG integration outweighed the effects of exclusion on the analysed indices.  
ESG performances found wide coverage among academic, with literature analysing the implementation of 
different strategies to portfolios in order to understand how performances are affected.  (Auer and 
Schuhmacher, 2016 [16]) analyse the performances of ESG portfolios using data from Sustainalytics for 
different regions: US, EU and Asia for a period from 2004 to 2012. They implement different portfolio 
screens and the result is that active selection of ESG stocks does not provide superior risk -adjusted return 
if compared to passive traditional strategies. Moreover, in Europe, investors tend to pay mor e for SRI, 
making it costly to them and therefore underperforming if compared to non -ESG portfolios.  
More evidence underlines how the valuation premium paid for companies with strong sustainability ratings 
has increased over time as a function of positive public sentiment momentum (Serafeim, 2018 [17]). The 
research uses data from MSCI and TruValue Labs to analyse how ESG criteria and public opinion are 
interconnected and what are the consequent effects of it. The evidence suggests that investing in portfolios 
with positive ESG momentum and negative public sentiment momentum delivers significant positive alpha. 
40    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Public sentiment influences investor views about the value of corporate sustainability activiti es and 
therefore both the price paid for corporate sustainability and the investment returns of portfolios that 
consider ESG data.   
Moreover, financial institutions and supervisors have addressed ESG in reports aimed at creating a 
smoother transition to a  greener economy. Among them the ECB and the NGFS have published different 
reports, one of them being a guide for central bank’s portfolio management. In their analysis they provide 
a risk -return review of SRI, which cites different studies in the matter o f ESG. (Bannier, Bofinger and Rock, 
2019 [18]) 56 published a paper in collaboration with the Centre for Financial Studies, analysing portfolios of 
ESG scores in US and Europe. They show that a portfolio  long in stocks with the highest ESG scores and 
short in those with the lowest scores yields a significantly negative abnormal return but also that the high 
ESG score portfolio reduces firm risk. Therefore, low ESG portfolios compensate the higher risk wit h higher 
returns.  
The existing literature reveals a largely mixed and somewhat inconsistent empirical evidence, in which the 
researches points out the difficulty of quantifying the real impact of ESG rating on the performances of 
portfolios. The inconclusiveness may depend on problems regarding different providers, methodologies, 
investment strategies, geographical selection, sample selection and timeframes. Building upon the findings 
and the insights of this literature, we now proceed to develop our model.  
OECD e mpirical research on ESG i nvesting  
Overview and findings  
In light of the wide variance in results of academic and industry assessments, the OECD staff sought to 
embark on analysis of ESG ratings, score composition, and performance. This an alysis was developed 
based on considerations of portfolio theory related to efficient frontiers. In accordance with the theories of 
portfolio construction, for a given expected return a rational investor would seek to reduce measures of 
uncertainty, such a s with respect to variance and downside risk.  
Given the broad research available on ESG and its concerns, the research sought to assess what we 
believe are the most important issues related to ESG ratings.  
In terms of attributes, ESG ratings can be useful  indicators of how a company is performing on sustainable 
metrics. In this regard, depending on the provider, we can identify two main types of ESG scores: an ESG 
disclosure score and an ESG risk management score. The first one will focus on how the compan y reports 
its information regarding sustainability while the second one will try to assess the main risks the company 
faces in the terms of ESG.  
Notwithstanding the differences in scoring methodologies, some common biases emerge from the 
analysis. In parti cular, size of the company, location in which the company operates, industry and 
materiality issues can affect how ESG scores are ultimately awarded.  
These differences in attributes and biases affect the resulting ESG score depending on the provider, which  
then influences the performances of portfolios applying ESG investing strategies. Therefore, we want to 
understand how portfolio analysis and risk -adjusted returns are determined by the choice of providers, 
timeframes and location.  
To reflect on these is sues, the concept of Modern Portfolio Theory is useful in helping to understand how 
added constraints, and therefore an increased concentration risk, affect risk -adjusted performances. In 
these terms the theory suggest that adding constraints should reduce  the risk -adjusted performances of 
portfolios. But, if we consider ESG scores as additional information, the constraints could help reduce tail 
risks, and the added concentration risk could be beneficial in the long term. Nonetheless, reducing the size 
of certain industry will increase volatility of the index, at least in the short term.  
   41 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Adding on these considerations, we deem useful to analyse the performance of funds incorporating 
different strategies and different sustainability scores. These funds will provide a useful point of view on 
the real performances resulting after the application of ESG scores.  
Institutional investors claim that investing in ESG implies having a positive impact but also achieving a 
higher return if compared to the market benchm ark. Therefore we want to assess how ESG scores 
application affects portfolios risk/return, through a positive screening approach and using data from 
different providers. Different screening criteria and different providers most likely imply different outc omes. 
Therefore our analysis is limited to the approaches just mentioned.  
The efficient frontier: Markowitz Modern Portfolio Theory (Markowitz, 1952 [19]). To test our hypothesis we 
will apply some p ractical concepts useful in the financial analysis of performances. The Markowitz Portfolio 
optimisation model tries to identify the best complete portfolio by allocating to the optimal risky portfolio 
and the risk -free asset. It does so assuming that inve stors are risk averse and that, given equal returns, 
an investor would prefer the one with less risk. Diversification plays an important role as the sole way of 
reducing risk.  
Fama & French 5 factors model  (Fama and French, 2013 [20]). Alternatively to the Capital Asset Pricing 
Model, which uses only the market as a variable to explain returns of the portfolio or a stock, the Fama 
and French factor model uses five variables which measure how the assets b ehave in relation to the 
market, whether it shows sign of being a small cap, if the price -to-book ratio is high, if investments are 
conservative and if profitability is robust. Despite critics, empirical tests suggest an improvement in the 
five-factor mode l explanatory power compared to the three -factor model and the CAPM.  
The first main finding  related to the correlation between high ESG scores and higher financial returns, 
based on backtesting of various portfolios over the past ten years. What we find is a very different result, 
mainly due to different providers’ methodology, investment strate gies, regions and time frames. This does 
not mean that all ESG portfolios underperformed the traditional market: however, many high -scoring ESG 
portfolios did underperform, and a number of low -scoring ESG portfolios outperformed the markets.  
It should be noted that one explanation for this is that many of the world largest investors rely on third -
party providers to gather data about ESG ratings, applying them in different ways. This inconsistent 
methodology and clarity over ESG can mislead investors to gen eralise about the potential for sustainable 
investments to outperform the market. It only shows that based on which methodology is used, results are 
going to diverge. Among other reason s, the correlation between ESG and future performance is low, so 
the ou tcome is influenc ed by other factors such as implementation strategies  
Therefore, it is important for investors and asset managers to thoroughly understand  ESG ratings and the 
choice of metrics, weightings, and other factors that drive rating results, to e nsure these align with investors 
needs related to objectives and risk tolerance.  Differences in  ESG investing strategies, providers and 
metrics prove it difficult to rely on a sole dataset to make decisions. From an investor perspective relying 
on a single  score to assess the sustainability could result in an over simplification that could have negative 
consequences on financial returns, without actually improving the sustainability of the portfolio.  
The second key finding  looks at absolute and risk -adjuste d return measures. We find that there is a wide 
range of performances depending on the provider used. Moreover, we found that high scoring ESG 
portfolios, even when using a best -in class approach that limits the concentration from reducing exposure 
to lowe r ESG scores, do not seem to outperform traditional indices. Nevertheless, we find a lower 
Drawdown risk exposure when looking at ESG indices compared to traditional indices. But, as already 
stated, different ratings methodologies provide very different ou tcomes. In the case of return and volatility, 
concentration risk generally implies a higher volatility of returns. This means that better absolute returns 
can be achieved allowing for higher volatility of the portfolio. Nonetheless the results remind us of  one 
important lesson from traditional finance: concentration risk can undermine risk -adjusted returns. 
Therefore, when applying investment approaches that limit the diversification of the investors’ portfolio, 
42    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  one should bear in mind that that comes at a cost. Moreover, the more information we are able to gain on 
a company regarding its ESG profile, the better. These scores, depending on the provider, can incorporate 
the firm -specific risk of each company, making it difficult to standardise and compare the m, and therefore 
making them less suitable for a market analysis.  
The third finding  of the analysis focuses on sustainable funds performances. We  sought to understand the 
link of ESG funds with risk and performance. To do this we analysed a sample of funds  from Morningstar 
with high and low ESG ratings. What we found is evidence of a lack of correlation between ESG scores 
and fund performance, measured in equity returns, but a lower tail risk associated with high -scoring ESG 
funds.  
Methodology  
To measure t he performances of ESG related portfolios we use different providers’ data to analyse how a 
positive ESG screening portfolio performed in these regions. To build the portfolios we use equal -weighted 
stocks selected through rating segregation for each regio n. We do the same for the single pillars: E, S and 
G to measure how they each perform. We then proceed to analyse the US small capitalised companies. 
We chose the US because it is by far the market with the higher coverage by data prov iders of ESG 
informat ion. 
Hypothesising that small capitalised companies sustain a relatively higher burden for implementing ESG 
scores (e.g. learning curve and implementation costs) and therefore being unfairly penalised in this 
regards, we analyse the state of the market to assess how ESG scores are distributed throughout publicly 
listed companies.  
Market penetration and attributes  
We start by analysing ESG scores market coverage in different areas: World, US, EU, and Japan according 
to Refinitiv data. We notice that the perc entage of market coverage is relatively low, particularly outside 
the US, even though it has greatly increased in the last years. In the US, market coverage has reached an 
all-time-high of almost 25% of public companies covered on these standards while in Europe and 
worldwide it is over 10%. Japan still lacks behind having just over 5% of enterprises covered on sustainable 
issues.  
Figure  12. ESG market coverage share  
 
Note: Calculated as the number of public companies with an ESG score over the total number of public companies, in each year.  

   43 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
But, when considering market capitalisation, we notice a different pattern: The market capitalisation of all 
ESG scoring companies represents 78% of the total market capitalisation in the world, 95% in the US, 89% 
in the EU, and 78% in Japan.  
Figure  13. Market capitalisation as share of ESG by region, 2019  
 
Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
The extent to which the ESG environme nt is dominated by large capitalised companies according to 
Refinitiv data is noteworthy, and has implications for weighting and potential bias. Possible explanations 
for the abundance of score availability for the largest companies by market capitalisatio n is that they have 
are more followed by analysts and investors and that they have ample resources to invest in disclosing 
information concerning their ESG scores while small capitalised companies would have a higher hurdle 
rate, given that there is some m inimum cost associated with the knowledge and resources to disclose non -
financial ESG information. Unfortunately small companies lack the resources to dedicate to these 
disclosures. As previously stated, stock exchanges such as NASDAQ and FTSE, among other s, have 
published their own guidelines aimed at helping companies that strive to meet ESG disclosure 
requirements to properly report the information regarding sustainability.  
A further analysis is aimed at verifying how companies changed their ESG scores during the last five years. 
Noticeably, low scoring companies have seen greater improvement than high -scoring companies, leading 
us to believe that the companies lagging behind have made tangible improvements to implement these 
standards given the increasi ng attention investors are giving to them.  
Investors’ awareness intensification is supported by a research from Goldman Sachs57, an investment 
bank, which has highlighted a 75% increase in the number of companies in the S&P 500 discussing key 
Environmental and Social terms from 2010 to 2017 on their earnings calls, with a peak of 41% from 2016 
to 2017. Such interest led to great i nflows of money to these type of sustainable products: Assets under 
management in ESG funds have risen 60% from USD  655 billion in 2012 to USD  1.05 billion in October 
2018, according to Morningstar.  

44    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  14. ESG rating shift to a different score, 2013 -2018  
 
Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
To assess how the environment surrounding ESG scores has changed in the past decade we analyse the 
fundamental ratios for the top 20% and bottom 20% ESG scores for three different ESG prov iders. Showing 
a higher growth for both ROE and Price -to-Book ratio for low scoring companies.  
Table  6. Compounded Annual Growth Rate for different financial metrics for different providers  
 Measures  Provider 1  Provider 2  Provider 3  2009 -2019 average  
US Top 20 % 
scoring ESG  ROE  0.0%  -3.6%  -0.8%  12% 
P/E 5.9%  0.2%  4.8%  18.4 
P/B 4.0%  -2.1%  4.0%  2.3 
US Bottom 20% 
scorin g ESG  ROE  2.9%  7.9%  1.2%  8.4%  
P/E 2.8%  -0.6%  3.0%  18.9 
P/B 5.3%  6.6%  3.5%  1.9 
Note: The CAGR is calculated from 2008 to 2018  
Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
ESG portfolio performance based on efficient frontiers  
In testing for the Markowitz efficient frontier, we noticed  that, depending on the ESG index 
analysed, risk adjusted performances vary . In particular, the risk analysis shows a varying 
volatility , but a  lower maximum drawdown  for ESG indices . 
Among others, some researches affirm that ESG assets provide an abnormal return while at the same time 
lowering the underlying volatility. Therefore we take steps to compute the Markowitz Efficient frontier. We 
do this including ESG indices and non -ESG indices from three different providers: MSCI, STOXX and 
Thomson Reuters, to assess whether ESG criteria influences risk -adjusted performances. We provid e a 
framework where every index is treated as if it was a single asset, to understand the difference in risk 
adjusted returns.  

   45 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  We analyse a total of twenty indices, twelve of which are ESG indices, to assess returns and risk -adjusted 
returns. We consider t he Sharpe Ratio for selecting the best performer. The Shape ratio measures the 
Risk-adjusted return through the equation: (Expected return of the portfolio – Risk-free rate of 
return)/(Standard deviation of the portfolio return). We compute the Minimum Var iance Portfolio and select 
the efficient frontier of risky assets. Then we analyse the maximum drawdown to understand how tail risk, 
which might not be captured by volatility, is reflected in these different indices.  
The drawdown risk is widely used indica tor of tail risk over a specified time period, which helps to 
understand downside risk in the event of extreme conditions. It  is calculated by comparing the value of a 
cumulative return with a previous peak that is the maximum cumulative return , in a pre -specified period of 
time. One example of extreme drawdown refers to the S&P500, which dropped around 48% in 2008, during 
the financial crisis.  
For ESG indexes we see a generally lower drawdown risk, which could be seen as well during the Covid -
19 pandemic c risis. The lockdown triggered a series of drops for most major indices. This was true even 
for ESG indices, even though in a lower measure, showing lower drawdown risk and higher resilience.   
When applying investment approaches that limit the diversificat ion of the investors’ portfolio, one should 
bear in mind that that involves concentration risk . This means that, according to the methodology of the 
ESG index adopted, some sectors or companies representing that sector could be excluded by the product. 
This can have different effects on the risk of that asset, which we try to report here. The first scenario could 
lead to a lower volatility, if the sector is generally more volatile, but to a higher – or lower - drawdown in the 
future. This, in fact, depends o n how the industry that is removed from the index is set to develop. If, for 
example, highly carbon dependant companies are removed from the index, this could increase the volatility 
in the short term, but if those industries will see a decline in the futu re this could avoid potential drawdown 
risk 
In this regard other research addressed the Modern Portfolio Theory to understand how sustainability 
integrates. There is no current evidence of over or under performance of sustainable funds as different 
researc h provide diverse outcomes. The IMF in its Global Financial Stability Report (2019) addressed 
sustainable finance and among other analysis, one focuses on the construction of an efficient frontier for 
sustainable and non -sustainable funds. The theory sugge sts that restricting the investment universe can 
reduce diversification and therefore lead to underperformance. The IMF analysis reflects that exclusionary 
screening increases volatility but the overall performance of sustainable and conventional funds rem ains 
comparable. The findings contrast with the ones by (Gasser, Rammerstorfer and Weinmayer, 2016 [21]), 
whom reconsider Markowitz Theory and suggest a modified version to integrate a social responsibi lity 
measure into the investment decision making method. Through an empirical analysis they show that 
investors choosing to maximise the social impact of their strategy face a statistically significant decrease 
in the expected return.  
We analyse a total of  nine MSCI indices, 6 of which are ESG indices, to assess returns and risk -adjusted 
returns. The ACWI Indices include developed and emerging economies. We consider these indices even 
though they are built using different methodologies and with different ob jectives in mind in terms of 
sustainability and risk management.  
We compute the Minimum Variance Portfolio and select the efficient frontier of risky assets. The results 
show that different ESG indices have varying risk and performances depending on how th ey are built. For 
example, the ACWI minimum volatility achieves the best Sharpe ratio, performimg slightly better than its 
ESG counterpart, even though the latter has a lower drawdown risk ( -7.83% against -8.56%), with that 
being true for most ESG indices.  For instance, the ACWI Quality ESG reduces the volatility of the 
benchmark while maintaining the same return. When looking at the other indices, they are treated as 
inefficient according to the efficient frontier. This might be due to the different nature  of the indices analysed 
and the fact that they are treated as single assets when they are not.  
46    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  15. MSCI Minimum variance frontier and price index with base value 100, 2014 -2019  
 
Source: MSCI, OECD calculations  
The same ana lysis applied to MSCI indices was applied to STOXX indices. We analyse seven different 
indices, 4 of which are ESG indices. In this case the best Sharpe ratio belong to the STOXX Global ESG 
Impact, which has a higher expected return but also a slightly hig her volatility. The lowest standard 
deviation is achieved by the STOXX Global Total Market Index. As we can see all the indices are have 
performances that are close, with standard deviations that do not vary much, except for the STOXX Global 
ESG Leaders, w hich underperformed if compared to the other indices. When looking at the Maximum 
drawdown we can notice that is it lower for ESG indices, except for the Global ESG Leaders.  
ACWI StandardACWI ESG LEADERSACWI MINIMUM 
VOLATILITY ESGACWI QUALITY
ACWI MULTIPLE -FACTOR ESGACWI ESG UNIVERSALACWI ESG FOCUSACWI MINIMUM 
VOLATILITYACWI QUALITY ESG
0.0%1.0%2.0%3.0%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%
0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.11 0.12 0.13Actual Return
Volatility
8090100110120130140150
Jul-14 Nov-14 Mar-15 Jul-15 Nov-15 Mar-16 Jul-16 Nov-16 Mar-17 Jul-17 Nov-17 Mar-18 Jul-18 Nov-18 Mar-19PriceACWI ESG FOCUS ACWI ESG LEADERS ACWI ESG UNIVERSAL
ACWI MIN VOLATILITY ESG ACWI MULTIPLE-FACTOR ESG ACWI QUALITY ESG
ACWI Standard ACWI MINIMUM VOLATILITY ACWI QUALITY
   47 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  16. STOXX Minimum variance frontier and price inde x with base value 100, 2014 -2019  
 
Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
The last analysis regards the indices provided by Thomson Reuters. We analyse four different indices, 2 
of which are ESG indices. In this case the best Sharpe ratio belongs to the TR IX Global ESG Equal 
Weighted, which has a higher Sharpe Ratio than the other and also the highest absolute returns. The 
minimum volatility in this case is a mix between a 70% position in the TR ESG High Dividend Low Volatility 
Index and a 30% in the TR Glo bal Developed Index.  It is important to notice that the TR IX Global ESG 
Equal Weighted has a total number of constituents equal to 494 against 4020 of the TR Global index. The 
first three industries by Market Cap weight in the ESG index have are Technolog y, financials and 
healthcare with respectively 28%, 17% and 14%, while in the Global index they are Financials, technology 
and consumer cyclicals with respectively 23%, 18%, and 12%. When analysing the drawdown risk we 
notice that ESG indices have a lower drawdown than standard indices.  
There are some limits to our analysis in the regards of Thomson Reuters. Considering all available indices, 
we were not able to identify a proper benchmark for the Thomson Reuters ESG High Dividend Low 
Volatility.  
STOXX Global 1800 ESG -
X
STOXX Global ESG 
LeadersSTOXX Global Total 
MarketSTOXX Global 1800STOXX Global ESG 
Impact
STOXX Global 3000STOXX Global 3000 ESG -
X
0.0%1.0%2.0%3.0%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%
0.112 0.114 0.116 0.118 0.120 0.122 0.124 0.126 0.128 0.130Actual return
Volatility
8090100110120130
Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Jul-16 Jan-17 Jul-17 Jan-18 Jul-18 Jan-19PriceSTOXX Global 1800 ESG-X STOXX Global 3000 ESG-X STOXX Global ESG Impact
STOXX Global ESG Leaders STOXX Global 1800 STOXX Global 3000
48    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  17. Thomson Reuters Minimum variance frontier and price index with base value 100, 2014 -
2019  
 
Source: Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Fama -French portfolio performance  
The excess return generated  depend s on the provider chosen  to build the portfolio , even though 
low scoring portfolios generally perform better than the market . 
The results of the assessment using the Fama and French data showed that, when adjusting for different 
type of risks, there is divergence between high scoring and l ow scoring ESG portfolios. This risks do not 
take into account the possibility of tail events which cannot be captured by the Fama and French factors.  
The methodology we use is based on the Fama and French 5 factors model. The model aims at pricing 
assets  after taking into account risk factors such as systematic market risk, size of companies and Book -
to-market ratio. The risk -adjusted alpha we extract from the model measures the excess return of an 
investment relative to the return of a benchmark index. I n our case the benchmark index is provided by 
Fama and French and is a proxy for the market58. To obtain this result we ran a regression between a 
portfolio of securities and the 5 factors provided by Fama and French.59 
In our hypothesis we wanted to examine  how ESG scores perform in comparison to the market, and in 
particular to assess whether high ESG scoring stocks outperform low scoring ESG stock we use the Fama 
TR IX Global ESG
TR ESG High Dividend Low 
VolatilityThomson Reuters Global 
Developed
Min. Volatility
Thomson Reuters Global
0.00%1.00%2.00%3.00%4.00%5.00%6.00%7.00%8.00%
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14Actual Return
Volatility
8090100110120130140150160
Jul-14 Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Jul-16 Jan-17 Jul-17 Jan-18 Jul-18 Jan-19PriceTR IX Global ESG High Dividend Low Volatility TR IX Global ESG
Thomson Reuters Global Developed Thomson Reuters Global
   49 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  & French 5 factors model. We can notice a similar pattern for each provider, except for one, w hich shows 
positive alpha on the best scoring ESG portfolio.  
Figure  18. ESG top and bottom quintile Alpha by different providers, US, 2009 -2019  
 
Note: Annualised Alpha estimated by the regression  
Source: Bloomberg, Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
The differences are very noticeable among the data that different providers allow users to download. As 
stated previously, differences in ESG ratings are profound and this is reflected on the performances of 
portfolios built through these data.  
Price indices show different returns and volatility depending on the provider.  
To understand how the price of these portfolio behaved we compute a price index to track performances 
of the different portfolio without taking i nto account for the carried risk.  
Figure  19. Top and bottom ESG portfolios by provider , price index, base value 100, 2009 -2019  
 
Source: Bloomberg, Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  

50    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Assessin g for b ias  
Market capi talisation has a strong, positive correlation with ESG scores for different providers, 
except for one.  We compare the market capitalisation of different market providers and noticed that, 
except for one provider, the others have a very strong ESG score to Market Capitalisation correlation. As 
stated in our hypothesis, ESG disclosure may be a burden for smaller companies, which may be less able 
to absorb high fixed costs of such reporting, such as through on boarding expertise and taking time to 
engage to re port on non -financial factors. By contrast, large capitalised companies have a certain degree 
of expertise on disclosures, and may also have the ability to invest in sustainable “opportunities” that would 
lower carbon footprints and engage in green opportu nities. Not to exclude the fact that large companies 
generally have a higher number of analysts covering them, which often results in more information 
available.  
Figure  20. Average company market capitalisation by ESG score and by different providers, 2019  
 
Note: Comparison of five different providers of ESG scores (shown in different colours) in terms of average market capitalization  
Source: Bloomberg, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Given the results supporting the difference in market capitalisation of high and low ESG scores found in 
the previous analysis, we decided to provide a performance analysis dividing our samples in small market 
capitalised stocks (between USD  300 million and USD  2 billion) and large market capitalise d stocks 
(> USD  10 billion). This allowed us to reduce the bias due to size.  
The level of the price indices differs depending on the provider and on market capitalisation. For 
two providers low ESG scoring, large capitalised companies are the best performers, while for one 
provider high ESG, large capitalised companies are outperforming their peers.  

   51 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Figure  21. Small and large market capitalised stocks by top and bottom ESG rating by three 
providers, price index, base value 1 00, US, 2009 -2019  
Provider 1  
  
Source: Bloomberg, MSCI Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Figure  22. Provider #2  
 
Source:  Bloomberg, MSCI Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Figure  23. Provider #3  
 
Source: Bloomberg,  MSCI Refinitiv, OECD calculations  

52    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  To deepen our understanding of the drivers of ESG scores we perform analysis aimed at identifying how 
and if different pillars drive the ESG ratings performances. Noticeably, there is a wide difference depending 
on the pr ovider chosen.  
The results suggest that results are mostly driven by the choice of the rating provider.  In this regard, the 
methodolog y does not seem to capture E, S or G factors in an appropriate way. The impact of better 
stakeholder relations on environm ental, social and governance issues may take longer time for the benefits 
to affect the sustainability of financial returns, such as through employee retention and customer loyalty. 
Notwithstanding the methodological differences, which makes the comparison  between providers even 
more difficult, the report underlines the need for more work in order to determine these influences.  
Figure  24. E,S,G pillars top and bottom quintiles comparison between providers, Alpha, 2009 -2019  
 
Note: Annualised Alpha  
Source: Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Portfolio construction & tilting  
The portfolio analysis we performed showed a  generally  lower risk -adjusted retur n for high scoring 
ESG ratings depending on the region analysed . The findings support our previous analysis, which 
suggested that the use of different providers will deliver different results in terms of performance. To 
understand if this happens when taking into account the risk/return relationship we compare how differ ent 
ESG scores notches perform. Hence, we build different portfolios segregating them in five ranges of 
scores: 0 -20, 20 -40, 40 -60, 60 -80, and 80 -100. In this way we are able to compare how tilting towards 
each level of the rating affects performances.  
Risk-adjusted ratio  Description  Equation  
Sharpe Ratio  Average portfolio excess return over the sample period by the 
standard deviation of returns over that period.  (R(p) -R(f))/σ( ep) 
Jensen’s Alpha  The excess return of an investment relative to the return of a 
benchmark index, given the Fama and French risk factors.  Alpha=R(p) -[R(f)+β*(R(m) -R(f)) 
+β*SMB+β*HML+β*RMW+β*CMA+ ϵ] 
Treynor Ratio  Average portfolio excess return over the sample period, divided by 
the systematic risk over that period.  (R(p) -R(f))/β(p ) 
Information Ratio  Portfolio returns relative to the returns of a benchmark compared to 
the volatility of those returns relative to the underlying benchmark.  Excess Return/Tracking error (p)  
-4%-3%-2%-1%0%1%2%3%4%5%
ENV top
provider 1ENV top
provider 2ENV
bottom
provider 1ENV
bottom
provider 2SOC top
provider 1SOC top
provider 2SOC
bottom
provider 1SOC
bottom
provider 2GOV top
provider 1GOV top
provider 2GOV
bottom
provider 1GOV
bottom
provider 2Alpha
   53 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Geographic comparisons  
The analysis divides the scores analysed for two different geographical regions: World and USA. The first 
selection aims to create equal -weighted ESG portfolio based on different providers’ data.  The findings 
support our previous analysis of non -outperformance of high ESG scoring portfol ios for the world analysis. 
The best notch for the world region is the portfolio of ESG scores between 0 -20. For the US, the 
best performing portfolios for Sharpe ratio strongly varies depending on the provider.  
Figure  25. Annualis ed Sharpe ratio by rating segregation for 5 different providers, World, 2009 -2019  
 
Source: Bloomberg, Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Figure  26. Annualised Sharpe ratio by rating segregation for 5 different pro viders, US, 2009 -2019  
 
Source: Bloomberg, Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  

54    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Performance by E, S, G Pillars  
The analysis of different pillars show different results depending on the provider . Our next analysis 
aimed at understanding if different pillars have different strengths as drivers of returns, with a focus in the 
US. We find that the best performers in terms of Sharpe ratio differ depending on the provider. The 
portfolios are equally p rice weighted and then divided using the E S or G score.  
Equal -weighted Pillar portfolios based on rating segregation:   
Figure  27. E,S,G pillars annualised Sharpe ratio by rating segregation and provider, US, 2009 -2019  
 
Source: Bloomberg, Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  

   55 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  US small capitalised companies tilting  
Underperformance of high scoring ESG portfolios is generally higher in the case of small 
capitalis ed companies , considered as companies with a market capi talisation between USD  300 million 
and USD  2 billion, in the US. If compared to a portfolio not discriminating the size of companies we can 
notice that the difference between scores is quite accentuated.  
To further assess how small capitalised stocks are influenced by ESG ratings, we analyse a sample based 
on the US stock market. Using two different providers (as data for other providers was not sufficient data 
for a complete analysis), we find that the lower scoring portfolio perform better on a risk -adjusted basis 
(Annualised Sharpe ratio). This, jointly with the fact that small capitalised stocks represent a very small 
part of the ESG environment, allows us to conclude that these companies sustain a burden for trying to 
implement and disclose sustainable  practices.  
Figure  28. United States annualised Sharpe ratio by small capitalised companies ESG segregation 
for two providers, 2009 -2019  
 
Source: Fama and French, MSCI, Refinitiv, OECD calculations  
Review of  funds ’ performance  
Distinct from indices and portfolios, we sought to assess the extent to which actual investment funds 
holding high -ESG issuers outperformed funds, which benefit from investment management strategies and 
decisions about ESG investments60. There was little di fference shown in the performance of high scoring 
and low scoring funds, showing for both a wide range of performance. The extent to which performance 
vary in both categories indicates that different factors, including specific investment strategies and ho w 
they are implemented, drive results of funds. There should not be generalisation based only on ESG 
scoring when looking at the financial returns of funds, suggesting the importance of financial education 
regarding retail funds.  
To perform the analysis, w e decided to examine a sample of funds from Morningstar to understand how 
do ESG ratings affect investors that decide to buy funds. We analyse the best 50 performing funds for the 
1, 3, 5 and 10 years annualised returns and compare them to their sustainabi lity rating, such that a 
Morningstar 5 is awarded to the funds with assets having the highest ESG scores (based on Sustainalytics 
ratings).  

56    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  The results of our analysis of Morningstar funds shows little correlation between sustainability and 
performances.  What we find is a negative correlation of sustainability and performances of around -0.5 
for different time periods (1  and 5 years) and slightly more negative for the 10 years ( -0.7). Among other 
research focusing on fund analysis, Morningstar analyses Euro pean Funds’ performance by strategy61. 
The research measures the performance of ESG funds compared to traditional ones. This report instead 
compares high ESG portfolios to low ESG ones.  
The results suggest the range of returns is so wide  due to factors ext ernal to ESG, which do not appears 
to be the key driver of returns. Particularly important among different things is the investment strategy 
chosen by the fund. One example is the difference in strategy adopted among the 5 star funds, which are 
the most su stainable ones. Among the best performers we can find investment strategies more focused 
on equity – global, US and growth stocks – while among the worst performers the most common strategies 
relied on investing in bonds, convertible bonds and money market  funds. The geography, sector and 
currency of the investment strategy also play an important part in determining the final result since these 
can vary depending on which fund is chosen.  
Figure  29. 10 years and 5 years annualised f unds’ performance to Morningstar sustainability rating, 
2019  
 
Source: Morningstar, OECD calculations  

   57 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  The results of the analysis focused on the best and worst rated funds provide a complete framework where 
we can notice how the distribution of the returns  ranges from about -20% to +20% for both categories, 
except for some outliers in the lower rated funds. In particular, while the distribution of the funds look 
similar, when focusing on the low scoring funds we notice they are much more likely to suffer fr om 
downside risk, with few funds performing well below -20%. Therefore, we can notice how even highly 
sustainable funds can have a wide range of performances, similarly to low rated funds.  
Figure  30. Distribution of 300 sustainable  funds performances (5 stars), 2019  
 
Note: Analysis of the 150 best and worst funds with a 5 star sustainability rating by Morningstar. The returns are 5 years annualis ed 
Source: Morningstar, OECD calculations  
Figure  31. Distribution of 300 low sustainability funds performances (1 and 2 stars), 2019  
 
Note: Analysis of the 150 best and worst funds with 1 and 2 stars sustainability rating by Morningstar. The returns are 5 years ann ualised.  
Source: Morningstar, OECD calculat ions 
 

58    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Box 1. The impact of ESG during Covid -19 
Following the spread of the pandemic of Covid -19 in Q1 2020, which put downward pressure on 
financial markets, sustainable finance market participants observed that ESG funds and indices 
outperformed traditional investments. In this regard, we provide a brief analysis of the main ESG funds 
in order to understand the magnitude of this outperformance and if ESG can actually improve portfolios’ 
resilience against tail risks. Different market actors such as Bloomberg, Morningstar and MSCI showed 
a relative over performance of ESG funds and indices over the standard ones, showing how these 
instruments lost less value than traditional indices during the downturn. The findings are consistent with 
the analysis run by OECD staff showing a lower drawdown risk for some ESG indices.  
To understand the extent of this lower underperformance, we analyse different indices from MSCI to 
see how they compare. The graph represents the MSCI ACWI Standard Index w ith value 100. This is 
done in order to compare MSCI ESG indices with the MSCI standard index . 
The relative performance shows that almost all MSCI ESG indices had lower underperformance than 
the ACWI standard index during this period. The only standard ind ex that performed better than its ESG 
counterpart is the MSCI Minimum Volatility Index, which performed better than the ESG counterpart did 
until end of April because it served as a hedge against the high uncertainty over the extent of economic 
consequence s from the pandemic.  
There has been significant discussion over ESG and underlying factors that supports the idea that the 
ESG impact on performance is due to factors tilting. This means that some ESG funds or indices could 
have over performed the market g iven the higher weight of technology and pharmaceutical companies, 
which have a generally higher ESG rating than energy companies if compared to the parent index. 
Moreover, some biases such as size, could have contributed to make the funds more value orien ted, 
including more resilient companies in the index or fund.  
Given the rapidity with which markets are changing and the unpredictability of how measures to address 
Covid -19 will evolve, further analysis will be needed to assess the genuine differences bet ween the returns 
and volatility of ESG and non -ESG indices and funds, the factors that contribute to these differences.  
Figure  32. Relative performance of selected MSCI Indexes to MSCI ACWI Index  
 
Source: MSCI, OECD calculations  
9899100101102103104105106107108109110111112PriceACWI ESG LEADERS WORLD ESG UNIVERSAL ACWI MINIMUM VOLATILITY
ACWI MINIMUM VOLATILITY ESG WORLD ESG ENHANCED FOCUS ACWI CLIMATE CHANGE
ACWI Standard (Large+Mid Cap)
   59 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Regulatory reforms  
In light of the rapid growth of assets under management by asset managers utilising forms of ESG 
practices, national financial regulators have begun to assess a range of practices associated with forms of 
sustainable finance, with an increasing focus on ESG taxonomies, approaches, and marketing to investors . 
Policy -makers are moving forward to strengthen practices with respect to sustainable finance in several 
ways, including but not limited to the following : 
 Taxonomies to clarify meaning;  
 Issuer disclosures of E S and G in both corporate and financial services sectors;  
 Disclosure of ESG fund products;  
 Rating agency and b enchmarks’ ESG disclosures .62 
 Policy development across Europe, US and Japan offer some exam ples of distinct ways in which 
steps are being considered to make ESG practices more transparency, consistent and resilient . 
Europe  
Key issues for further consideration relate to: (i) ensuring relevance and consistency in reporting 
frameworks for ESG discl osure ; (ii) opacity of the s ubjective elements of ESG scoring; (iii) improving 
alignment with materiality and performance ; (iv) overcoming the market bias ; (v) transparency of ESG 
products alignment with investors’ sustainable finance objectives related to  financial and social returns ; 
and, (vi) public and regulatory engagement.  
Over the past several years, the European Commission has assessed practices and implications of 
sustainable finance.  The EC states that sustainable finance generally refers to the process of taking due 
account of environmental, social and governance (ESG) considerations when making investment decisions 
in the financial sector, leading to increased longer -term investments into sustainable economic activities 
and projects.63   
This fol lows actions by the EU, as part of their commitment to achieve the United Nation's 2030 Agenda 
and Sustainable Development Goals and to comply with various international agreements, such as the 
Paris Climate Agreement, to move ahead on ESG disclosures and benchmarks trough the EU Action Plan 
on Sustainable Finance. This aims to provide a regulatory framework to support and promote sustainable 
investment in the EU.  
The European Commission’s Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance has published its fin al 
Taxonomy report for screening environmentally sustainable activities.  In March 2020, the TEG final report 
on the EU Taxonomy outlined taxonomies associated with sustainable investment, in ways that would also 
help clarify aspects of ESG. The EU’s taxon omy is expected to facilitate a pan -European ecolabel for 
financial products.  ESG and policy developments   
60    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), the EU’s securities markets regulator, published 
its Strategy on Sustainable Finance.64 The strategy sets out how ESMA will p lace sustainability at the core 
of its activities by embedding Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) factors in its work. The key 
priorities for ESMA include transparency obligations, risk analysis on green bonds  and ESG investing , 
including ESG fund s and benchmarks , convergence of national supervisory practices on ESG factors, 
taxonomy, and supervision. ESMA will pursue convergence of national supervisory practices on ESG 
factors to help mitigate the risk of greenwashing, prevent mis -selling practice s, and foster transparency 
and reliability in the reporting of non -financial information.  
Moreover, in mid -2020, ESMA, and European insurance and banking bodies EIOPA and EBA, issued a 
Consultation Paper seeking input on proposed environmental, social and governance (ESG)  disclosure 
standards for financial market parti cipants, advisers and products. The consultation paper closed on 
September 1st and it will be consequently finalised and submitted to the European Commission. These 
standards were developed un der the EU Regulation on sustainability -related disclosures in the financial 
services sector (SFDR), aiming to strengthen protection for end -investors; improve the disclosures to 
investors from a broad range of financial market participants and financial a dvisers; and improve the 
disclosures to investors regarding financial products.  
United States  
In response to a Senate request, the US Government Accountability Office conducted a review of ESG 
disclosure and investment practices. Among findings, it noted65: 
 Selected companies generally disclosed many ESG topics but differences in how companies 
reported the lack of detail and consistency may reduce usefulness to investors;  
 Most companies disclosed on many ESG risk topics, but detail s varied on ho w ESG -related  risks 
are managed.  
The report also explored various policy options to enhance ESG disclosures, which ranged from regulatory 
actions to private sector approaches. The report suggested that a key impediment to improved ESG 
disclosures raised among stakehold ers was the lack of consensus around what information companies 
should be disclosing. As such, it notes that requiring ESG disclosures in companies’ regulatory filings 
rather than across multiple locations —could reduce information disparities between large  and small 
investors, because the information would become more  standardis ed.66 Furthermore, it noted that some 
market observers recommended that SEC issue a new rule endorsing one or more comprehensive ESG 
reporting frameworks. However, other participants preferred that the industry be allowed to develop 
frameworks, such as based on SASB or GRI reporting frameworks for sustainability.  
The SEC is engaging in consideration of ESG issues through several avenues. The GAO Report describes 
SEC staff’s principle -based approach to overseeing public companies’ disclosures of nonfinancial 
information, includi ng information on ESG topics. The GAO Report states that:  
Under this approach, SEC staff rely primarily on companies to determine what information is material and  
requires disclosure in their SEC filings, such as the 10 -K filing. SEC officials noted that companies are 
ultimately responsible for the disclosures they provide to investors, and they have liability for their 
disclosures under federal and state securitie s laws. While federal securities laws generally do not 
specifically address the disclosure of ESG information, Regulation S -K’s disclosure requirements for 
nonfinancial information apply to material ESG topics.  
The Division of Corporation Finance has dist ributed internal review guidance on a few ESG -related topics. 
This guidance illustrates how existing disclosure requirements may apply to a given topic and offers 
information for staff to consider when conducting background research and performing filing r eviews. In 
cases where the SEC review team identifies a potential disclosure deficiency related to an ESG -related  or 
other topic, they may issue a comment letter to the company to request additional information or additional 
   61 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  disclosures when necessary. Mos t review staff with whom we spoke said ESG -related information 
generally does not rise to the level of comment unless they identify material information during background 
research that may be relevant to the company’s operations.  
In addition to internal as sessments, SEC has taken steps to identify significant emerging disclosure issues 
through the creation of the Office of Risk and Strategy within Corporation Finance.  According to 
Corporation Finance officials, this office was created in February 2018 and was allocated additional 
resources in October 2019 to support its risk surveillance function, in which it identifies emerging issues 
that may be material for public companies by reviewing press articles, speeches, and information from 
other sources such as  industry experts. According to Corporation Finance officials, once the office 
identifies an issue that may present material disclosure risks, it may perform research and analysis that 
can determine whether further internal or external guidance may be nece ssary. Corporation Finance 
officials also noted these efforts may result in additional guidance to review staff based on topics identified.  
In August 2020, the SE C adopted amendments to modernis e Regulation S -K.  The amendments to 
Regulation S -K added for the first time a requirement that registrants disclose, as a separate disclosure 
topic, a description of the registrant’s human capital resources, to the extent such disclosures would be 
material to an understanding of the registrant’s business.   In adopt ing these rules, the SEC noted that the 
exact measures and objectives included in human capital management disclosure may evolve over time 
and may depend, and vary significantly, based on factors such as the industry, the various regions or 
jurisdictions i n which the registrant operates, the general strategic posture of the registrant, including 
whether and the extent to which the registrant is vertically integrated, as well as the then -current 
macroeconomic and other conditions that affect human capital re sources, such as national or global health 
matters.  With respect to metrics or other measures, the SEC noted that, under this principles -based 
approach, to the extent that a measure, for example, of a registrant’s part -time employees, full -time 
employees,  independent contractors and contingent workers, and employee turnover, in all or a portion of 
the registrant’s business, is material to an understanding of the registrant’s business, the registrant must 
disclose this information.  
The SEC has also recently  requested comments on how existing rules relate to ESG labelling.   
In 2020 the SEC issued a Request for Comment related to Rule 35d -1 of the Investment Company Act of 
1940 (“Names Rule”) , which prohibits funds from using materially deceptive or misleadin g names.67 The 
rule requires a fund with a name suggesting that the fund focuses on a particular type of investment (e.g., 
"stocks"  or "bonds") to invest at least 80% of its assets accordingly.  Among a number of other fund names 
questions,  the Request for Comment asked questions related to funds that include terms such as “ESG” 
and “sustainable” in their name.  With respect to these funds, the Request for Comment acknowledges that 
“funds with investment mandates that include criteria that require  some degree of qualitative assessment 
or judgment of certain characteristics (such as funds that include one or more environmental, social, and 
governance -oriented assessments or judgments in their investment mandates (e.g., ‘ESG’ investment 
mandates)) is growing  and may present challenges regarding the application of the Names Rule.  Among 
other things, the SEC notes  that some funds appear to treat terms such as ‘ESG’  as “an investment 
strategy (to which the Names Rule does not apply) and accordingly do n ot impose an 80% investment 
policy, while others appear to treat ‘ESG’ as a type of investment (which is subject to the Names Rule).”   
Japan  
Japanese financial authorities are paying greater attention to ESG  considerations  as it relates to 
governance and  sustainable finance.  
As early as 2018, Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) created a label to identify 
companies that are reporting on ESG performance, as part of efforts to improve corporate disclosure and 
improve the long -term invest ing landscape. In July 2019, METI issued a report for promoting ESG 
investments by taking advantage of SDG business management, which included examining and 
62    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  streamlining ESG investment performance, and review of how to facilitate market structures to stimu late 
long-term investment.  
In 2020, Japan’s Financial Services Agency has revised its stewardship code of conduct, including with 
respect to sustainable finance. It redefines “stewardship responsibilities” and explicitly instructs institutional 
investors t o consider medium - to long -term sustainability, including ESG factors, according to their 
investment management strategies in the course of their constructive engagement with companies in 
which they invest. The revisions call on institutional investors to engage in dialogue with investee 
companies and clearly state how they will incorporate ESG  considerations  into their investment 
strategies.68  
Also, according to officials from Japan’s Financial Services Agency, listing requirements on the Tokyo 
Stock Excha nge have helped change how Japanese companies disclose ESG -related information and 
engage in proactive risk management.69 To this end, the Japan Exchange Group and Tokyo Stock 
Exchange publish ed the Practical Handbook for  ESG Disclosure .70 Key elements of th e approach include: 
(i) ESG issues and investment; (ii) connecting ESG  issues  to firm strategy; (iii) Disclosure oversight and 
implementation; (iv) information disclosure and engagement.  
In this manner, a number of additional jurisdictions are taking step s to address perceived concerns about 
the clarity of ESG  frameworks , among asset managers, retail investors and other market participants, to 
help strengthen market resilience and integrity.  
Considerations to s trengthen global ESG practices  
The results of OECD staff assessment of ESG practices and quantitative analysis of its performance, 
suggest that, notwithstanding progress to enhance data availability and analysis, further efforts by policy -
makers, financial market participants and other stakeholders wi ll be needed to strengthen ESG practices. 
Given the work in progress across regulatory bodies and financial markets is progressing in varying speeds 
and directions, the following high -level considerations would help bring global consistency to allow variou s 
constituencies to focus their efforts within and across markets, to ensure market fragmentation does not 
result. In doing so, financial markets are more able to efficiently support long -term value and sustainable 
economic growth.  
The considerations refle ct 5 key areas, including: (i) consistency, comparability and quality of core metrics; 
(ii) ensuring relevance of reporting through financial materiality; (iii) levelling the playing field of ESG 
disclosure and ratings across large and small issuers; (iv) transparency and comparability of scoring 
methodologies of established ESG ratings providers and indices (v) ESG product labelling and 
communication.  
Ensuring consistency, comparability and quality of core metrics in reporting frameworks 
for ESG disclosure   
Notwithstanding substantial efforts to improve ESG disclosure frameworks in recent years, the reporting 
of ESG factors still suffers from considerable shortcomings with respect to consistency, comparability and 
quality that undermine its usefulness to investors.  
While there are valid reasons for different reporting frameworks depending on preferences of investors 
and the evolution of data availability71, greater consistency, comparability and quality could be achieved 
by greater attention to levels of co re metrics that apply to all issuers, and tiers of metrics within sectors and 
industries.  
First, irrespective of industry, core metrics  that form the core reporting of E, S, and G sh ould be confirmed 
and standardis ed, so that they can be promoted by excha nges and  framework providers, and utilis ed by 
   63 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG raters and end -users. Quality could be achieved in this area by focusing  on maximis ing data 
availability for these metrics, across jurisdictions and by large and small issuers alike.  
Second, additional sect or-specific metrics within each pillar of E, S, and G subcategories should be 
developed to capture specific elements of E, S, and G that are most relevant to the sectors. In this respect, 
the way in which environmental risks are captured in energy and fina ncial sectors would be quite different, 
so sector -specific tailoring would be essential for relevance. Frameworks might benefit from indicating 
trade -offs associated with completeness vs availability, suggesting how sector -specific metrics might 
further de velop over time as more consistent data becomes available.  
Third, industry -specific factors that could shed additional light could be considered. For example, the way 
that financial industries are regulated (banks, insurance, asset managers, and security exchanges) differ 
considerably, so differences with respect to governance might be important to capture. These gradations 
should help ma ximis e the relevance of metrics to satisfy the decision -relevant needs of investors.  
Some industry participants have not ed that a lack of consistent disclosure frameworks at the international 
level hinders comparability. While progress is being made at the SASB, GRI, TCFD, and other related 
framework providers, there is not currently a universally accepted  global set of pri nciples and guidelines 
for consistent and meaningful ESG  reporting . As such, the lack of accepted data -reporting standards 
suggests investors cannot readily compare or combine assessments when development portfolios with 
multi -jurisdiction exposures.  
Ensu ring relevance of reporting through financial materiality over the medium and long -
term   
The mixed evidence regarding the relative performance higher ESG -rated portfolios against traditional 
portfolios raises the need for more thorough assessment of how f inancial materiality is captured in ESG 
data and ratings.  
Currently, the various ESG reporting and ratings approaches generally do not sufficiently clarify either 
financial materiality or non -financial materiality (e.g. social impact), so investors are no t currently able to 
get a clear picture of whether the measurements suggest a net positive or negative effect on financial 
performance.  
An example of a financial material framework for ESG reporting is the materiality map developed by SASB, 
which emphasis es the importance of financial materiality and embeds its importance at the industry level. 
SASB notes that it prioritises and maps issues that are reasonably likely to directly impact the financial 
condition or operating performance of a company and there fore are most important to investors.72 
Financial materiality over the medium to long -term may be influenced by societal values related to 
environment, governance and social issues. For example, customer and employee loyalty to well -run, 
socially responsibl e companies help business maintain consistent revenue streams and retain talent and 
intangible assets. Attention to climate risks may improve firms’ resilience against growing physical risks as 
a consequence of global warming. As such, policy -makers and ma rket stakeholders should give more 
attention to the types of non -financial reporting that can help investors make decisions about longer -term 
financial materiality.  
With these points in mind, it is imperative that ESG reporting, rating, and investing evolv es to:  
 Prioritis e relevance of metrics based on financial materiality;  
 Clarify how ESG financial materiality differs across sectors and industries, to ensure that chosen 
core and sector/industry metrics capture the important components of materiality from E,S, and G 
issues;  
 Give consider ation  to the relative weighting of metrics by financial materiality, to help shape ESG 
assessments and scores;  
64    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   Support this, where possible, by explaining the temporal nature of materiality, and whether the 
material impact i s more likely to be affected over the near, medium or long term.  
This last step would benefit from significant contributions from issuers, investors, academia and policy 
organisations to assess the extent to which forward looking ESG factors might and do affect financial 
materiality, how they affect materiality (through which channels, benefits and risks). Over time, ESG 
frameworks should be refined to incorporate a more informed understanding of what counts and why.  
Levelling the playing field between lar ge and small issuers related to ESG disclosure and 
ratings  
Research by the OECD and several external sources suggests that there is an ESG scoring bias in favour 
of large -cap companies, and against SMEs. This burden, which appears to be quite substantial f or SMEs, 
may be due in part to the ability of large firms to dedicate more resources to the reporting and 
communications functions, which can help advance the firms’ capabilities in producing data and metrics 
that conform to the needs of ratings firms and a plethora of investors. However, this bias, and the hurdle 
of unlocking this useful ESG information from smaller companies, poses a market inefficiency to the extent 
it affects both relative cost of capital and corporate reputation. This inefficiency will  need to be improved?  
to ensure that SMEs across OECD countries have access to low -cost financing in an efficient manner.  
There is some evidence that this bias also exists with respect to ESG scores among Emerging Market 
issuers. As there is lower ESG disc losure practice in parts of EMEs, some companies with sound practices 
with respect to environmental, social and governance iss ues could be penalis ed because they have not 
yet engaging in disclosing their assessment of ESG risks and opportunities in a manne r consistent with 
emerging good practices. In this respect, while different methodologies to assess corporate value are 
welcome, the lack of consistency and transparency of core metrics is creating unnecessary reporting 
burdens and inefficiencies in terms of the relevance of disclosure.  
To overcome this implicit bias, standardisation of the use of core metrics and sector/industry specific 
metrics needs to occur. Moreover, th is should be guided by prioritis ation based on financial materiality, so 
that SMEs i n particular can prioritise their dat a collection to develop metrics that are most decision -relevant 
to equity and debt investors. These steps should help level the playing field, to eliminate the gap between 
large and small firm’s ratings over time.73 To this end, the NASDAQ  ESG 2.0 reporting guidance offers a 
useful guide as to specific information categories metrics, and the frameworks that utilise such metrics, to 
help smalle r companies provide a standardis ed approach to ESG reporting.74 Such types of pra ctical 
guidance – based on financial materiality and prioritisation -- may serve as a foundation from which to 
provide more robust standardis ed reporting to help level the playing field.  
Promoting the transparency and comparability of scoring and weighting  methodologies 
of established ESG ratings providers and indices  
Given the abundance of ESG information being disclosed through a variety of disclosure frameworks from 
exchanges and framework standard setters, ESG ratings providers can play a valuable role through 
structured assessments, based on rigorous methodologies that allow for consistency in ratings and have 
the potential to enhance comparability. As ESG practices and concepts over financial materiality are still 
at a relatively early stage of develop ment (e.g. relative to credit ratings), the specialisation of ESG raters 
across many thousands of issuers can extract value from ESG disclosures through the ratings process 
and outputs. Moreover, some of these rating providers have also developed suites of  ESG indices to 
empower investors to reallocate portfolios in a manner tilted toward higher ESG -scored issuers. As these 
analytical and benchmark products become mainstreamed, appropriate and effective functioning of these 
products as understood by market participants will be critical to maintain market integrity and trust.   
However, at this stage, evidence provided in this report through OECD staff analysis and other research 
indicates that major ESG raters’ outputs give rise to several challenges. First,  even if ESG ratings were 
   65 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  internally consistent and rigorous, the outp uts across major providers show  a very low degree of correlation 
as to what consti tutes a high or low -scoring ESG rating . Also, the wide differences in factor subcategories 
below the E, S, and G, the number of metrics, their weighting, and subjective judgment that contribute to 
score outputs undermines comparability.  Furthermore, the methodologies of rebalancing to achieve best -
in-class can further obfuscate the comparability of ratings across industries, even for one provider. Lastly, 
while recent progress has been made to improve transparency and investor education, greater 
transparency is needed to understand what drives scores, how they compare, and the extent to which they 
seek to ex plicitly align with financial materiality.  
Therefore, there is more room for efforts in the following areas:  
 Further explain the  methodological frameworks and their choice of specific subcategories and 
metrics , in light with efforts of disclosure regimes (discussed above) to focus on core metrics, and 
sector and industry specific metrics. Where metrics are quantified, or binary, or are judgement -
based, explanations should be given to consider the quality of information. Moreover, where 
metrics relate to op portunities (such as renewables strategies), further explanation is needed to 
document the extent to which the actual implementation of forward -looking plans are verified over 
time.  
 Disclose the weightings of metrics to arrive at pillar scores, and the re -weighting to arrive at best -
of class rebalancing . Methodologies should describe the rationale for choices of metrics and 
weightings and, where appropriate, why commonly used metrics in ESG disclosure were not 
utilised.  Also, where best -in-class rebalancin g occurs, offer absolute (pre -rebalancing) and relative 
scores so investors be able to see the net impact of the rebalancing. Moreover, where elements 
beyond these factors influence scoring – namely, subjective judgment – methodologies should give 
guidance  as to how and why this occurs, on what basis, and efforts to ensure consistency across 
ratings and across rating cycles.  
 Clarify how this relates to explicit financial materiality , or implied long -term materiality by behaving 
in a responsible manner that can improve reputation and financial standing over the long -term.  In 
this manner, where possible, the ratings methodologies should articulate the providers view of the 
nature of financial materiality, and how this has influenced the choice and weighting o f metrics. 
Likewise, the use of metrics that are of growing importance for environmental materiality, such as 
carbon footprint and waste, and social values should be clarified. Prominent ESG raters appear to 
be aware of the need to strengthen the alignment  with financial materiality, where appropriate, and 
to make their methodologies more transparent and comparable.75 
 Promote even greater transparency and investor education about methodologies and results of 
portfolio composition relative to traditional mark et portfolios. To strengthen the impact of ESG 
ratings on the resilience of financial markets, there is room to further strengthen the transparency 
of methodologies and productive interactions with ESG rating agencies.76 
Appropriate labelling and disclosure  of ESG products to adequately inform investors of 
how ESG considerations are used in the product, using comparable and consistent 
metrics that align with financial materiality, to allow market participants to make 
investment and voting decisions in line w ith their investment objectives and risk 
tolerance.  
Staff analysis of the wide dispersion of financial performance of funds that comprise high and low ESG 
portfolios suggests that a number of factors, including and also in addition to ESG considerations, are 
driving the differences in returns. They include investment objectives and risk tolerance, strategy, portfolio 
manager decisions and trading execution among others. In this respect, it would be very difficult for all but 
the most sophisticated investor s – even with the benefit of transparency and comparable data – to assess 
the ESG contribution to portfolio returns relative to many other factors. The interaction between ESG 
approaches and strategy are complicated further when strategies – such as impact  or momentum – may 
66    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  exploit inefficien cies in ESG investing to maximis e returns. For example, the strategy to invest in low -rated 
ESG companies (reverse tilting) and then to engage with management to improve ESG practices and 
financial returns has shown pro mising results. Yet, this portfolio would initially look very different in asset 
selection and weighting than a high -ESG portfolio that simply maintains investments in the highest rated 
assets. In this manner, understanding how ESG approaches interact with  fund investment styles and 
strategies, and return attribution, remain enigmatic. Therefore, labelling and disclosure are critical to 
ensure investors have adequate information to make critical decisions about investment and voting.  
Moreover, while not the  focus of this report, a growing portion of investors seek to align portfolios with 
socially responsible business practices. Irrespective of whether such investors choose to pursue a holistic 
strategy to achieve long -term value, or simply wish to balance a dequate financial and social returns, their 
ability to make informed decisions would depend on the disclosure of ESG metrics that align with such 
standards, ranging from lowering carbon intensity to gender balance on corporate boards to responsible 
conduct  in supply chain management.  
As such, it is imperative that labelling and disclosure of ESG funds clearly provide quantitative and 
qualitative information so that investors can make informed choices. Considerations for labelling and 
disclosure would includ e the following:  
 Use of consistent lexicon for ESG practices and approaches . 
o This could be supported by an ESG taxonomy that sets guidepost for a global lexicon for 
labelling and disclosure in a consistent and comparable fashion, yet noting that terminolog y 
may differ across jurisdictions given the different practices and regulatory initiatives.  
 Clarify how ESG approaches interact with fund types and strategies . 
 Explain how the chosen ESG approach has affected the fund composition by sector and industry 
relative to the benchmark index from which t he fund performance is asse ssed. 
o ESG asset exclusion and portfolio tilting can be achieved to various degrees, which has a 
material impact of returns, volatility, industry or asset concentration, and other risks. Ex plaining 
how ESG exclusion and tilting contributes to these factors would help investors judge whether 
the fund aligns with their own investment (financial, and/or social) return objectives.  
o In fixed income funds that utilis e credit ratings to determine al lowed assets or asset 
composition, compare how ESG affected the overall asset allocation and credit risk, and 
expected returns relative.  
o Where ESG integration is embedded in the decision -making of assets, explain how the ESG 
assessment contributed to the a sset allocation associated with the fund’s investment strategy.  
 Explain how the ESG approach impacted fund performance relative to the performance of stated 
benchmark or ESG -neutral portfolio of the same strategy.  
o In this respect, simply stating that the u se of ESG criteria may affect the fund’s investment 
performance relative to similar funds that do not use ESG criteria is insufficient to adequately 
inform investors.  
o If the ESG fund p erformance is compared to stylis ed ESG benchmark from a third party 
provider, the fund disclosure should include information on how the ESG benchmark differs 
from the non -ESG similar benchmark (or make reference to the product’s own disclosures, so 
it is clearly accessible to investors).  
In light of these issue, more transpare ncy is be needed to ensure that funds are disclosing the full spectrum 
of performance criteria in terms of past returns and risks, and the extent to which this is due to portfolio 
decisions that could compromise absolute or risk -adjusted returns relative t o a suitable traditional index, 
based at least on past performance.  
Greater stakeholder engagement at the global level  
   67 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  An implicit theme throughout this report is that improvements to ESG practices will require greater global 
engagement among policy -maker s, the financial industry, end -investors , and other stakeholders that are 
helping to shape ESG practices. While progress has been made to develop ESG practices by several ESG 
framework providers, and by various regulators, it has accentuated the persistenc e of metric 
inconsistencies and lack of comparability risks. More efforts are needed at the global level to ensure that 
ESG practices further progress in a manner that does not give rise to market fragmentation, and upholds 
investor confidence and market i ntegrity.  
In this regard, there is scope for considering how the OECD can further facilitate awareness and discussion 
of challenges and solutions related to ESG investing, including with respect to the need for guidance on 
improving consistency and transp arency, alignment with materiality, frameworks, and good practices of 
benchmark and fund reporting.  
 
68    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
Alexander,  G. and R.  Buchholz (1978), “Research Notes. C orporate Social Responsibility and 
Stock M arket Performanc e”, Academy of  Management Journal , Vol.  21/3, pp.  479-486, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/255728 . [1] 
Auer,  B. and F.  Schuhmacher (2016), “Do socially (ir)responsible investments pay? New 
evidence from international ESG data”, The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance , 
Vol. 59, pp.  51-62, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.qref.2015.07.002 . [16] 
Aupperle,  K., A.  Carroll and J.  Hatfield (1985), “ An Empiric al Examin ation o f the R elationship  
between Corpor ate Social Responsibility  and Profitability ”, Academy of Management Jour nal, 
Vol. 28/2, pp.  446-463, http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/256210 . [3] 
Bank of America Merrill Lynch (2019), ESG from A to Z: a global primer . [11] 
Bank of America Merrill Lynch (2018), The ABCs of ESG . [39] 
Bannier,  C., Y.  Bofinger and B.  Rock (2019), Doing safe by doing good : ESG investing and 
corporate social responsibility in the U.S. and Europe , https://ssrn.com/abstract=3387073 . [18] 
Berg,  F., J.  Kölbel and R.  Rigobon (2019), “Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG 
Ratings”, SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3438533 . [13] 
Blackburn,  V., M.  Doran and C.  Shrader (1994), “Investigating The Dimensions Of Social 
Responsibility And The Consequences For Corporate Financial Performance”, Journal of 
Managerial Issues , Vol.  6/2, pp. 195-212, http://www.jstor.org/stable/40604020 . [4] 
BNP (2018), Investing for tomorrow: applying ESG principles to emerging market debt . [36] 
Bos, J. (2017), Sustainability Scores for Investment Funds , CFA Institute Magazine.  [38] 
Cerulli and UN PRI (2019), Survey: Responsible Investment in Hedge Funds -The Growing 
Importance of Impact and Legacy . [37] 
Climate Disclosure Standards Board (2012), Climate Change Reporting Framework Advancing 
and aligning disclosure of climate change - related information  in mainstream reports.  [29] 
Cochran,  P. and R.  Wood (1984), “Corporate Social Responsibility and Financial Performance.”, 
Academy of Management Journal , Vol.  27/1, pp.  42-56, http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/255956 . [2] 
Dolvin,  S., J.  Fulkerson and A.  Krukover (2017), “Do ’Good Guys’ Finish Last? The Relationship 
between Morningstar Sustainability Ratings and Mutual Fund Performance”, SSRN Electronic 
Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3019403 . [24] References  
   69 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Dye, R. (1985), “ Disclosure of Nonproprietary Information”, Journal of Accounting Research , 
Vol. 23/1, p.  123, http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2490910 . [45] 
European Commission (2018), Feedback Statement: Feedback Statement Public Consultation 
on Institutional Investors’ and As set Managers’ Duties regarding Sustainability.  [47] 
Fama,  E. and K.  French (2013), “A Four -Factor Model for the Size, Value, and Profitability 
Patterns in Stock Returns”, SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2287202 . [20] 
Fatemi,  A., I. Fooladi and H.  Tehranian (2015), “Valuation effects of corporate social 
responsibility”, Journal of Banking & Finance , Vol.  59, pp.  182-192, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2015.04.028 . [42] 
Fatemi,  A., M.  Glaum and S.  Kaiser (2018), “ESG performance and firm value: The moderating 
role of disclosure”, Global Finance Journal , Vol.  38, pp.  45-64, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gfj.2017.03.001 . [41] 
Friede,  G., T.  Busch and A.  Bassen (2015), “ESG a nd financial performance: aggregated 
evidence from more than 2000 empirical studies”, Journal of Sustainable Finance & 
Investment , Vol.  5/4, pp.  210-233, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/20430795.2015.1118917 . [10] 
Gasser,  S., M.  Rammerstorfer and K.  Weinmayer ( 2016), “Markowitz Revisited Social Portfolio 
Engineering”, SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2481987 . [21] 
Gibson,  R. et  al. (2019), “ESG Rating Disagreement and Stock Returns”, SSRN Electronic 
Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3433728 . [15] 
Giese,  G. et  al. (2019), “Foundations of ESG Investing: How ESG Affects Equity Valuation, Risk, 
and Performance”, The Journal of Portfolio Management , Vol.  45/5, pp.  69-83, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2019.45 .5.069 . [22] 
Giese,  G. et  al. (2019), “Performance and Risk Analysis of Index -Based ESG Portfolios”, The 
Journal of Index Investing , Vol.  9/4, pp.  46-57, http://dx.doi.org/10.3905/jii.2019.9.4.046 . [23] 
Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (2018), Global Sustainable Investment Review , Global 
Sustainable Investment Alliance.  [25] 
Gorgen,  M., M.  Nerlinger and M.  Wilkens (2017), “Carbon Risk”, SSRN Electronic Journal , 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2930897 . [6] 
GRI (2018), The Materiality Principle: The Deep Dive.  [34] 
ICI (2020), Funds’ Use of ESG Integration and Sustainable Investing Strategies: An Introduction . [52] 
IOPS (2019), Supervisory guidelines on the integration of ESG factors in the investment and risk 
management of pension funds.  [54] 
IOSCO (2020), Sustainable Finance and the Role of Securities Regulators and IOSCO. . [55] 
J.P. Morgan (2016), ESG Investing: A quantitative perspective on how ESG can enhance your 
portfolio . [12] 
J.P. Morgan (2016), ESG, Environmental, Social and Governance Investing . [35] 
70    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Kacperczyk,  M. and H.  Hong (2006), “The Price of Sin: The Effects of Social Norms on Markets”, 
SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.766465 . [5] 
Khan,  M., G.  Serafeim and A.  Yoon (2015), “Corporate Sustainabil ity: First Evidence on 
Materiality”, SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2575912 . [14] 
Margolis,  J., H.  Elfenbein and J.  Walsh (2009), “Does it Pay to Be Good...And Does it Matter? A 
Meta -Analysis of the Relationship between Corporate Social and Financial Performance”, 
SSRN Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1866371 . [8] 
Markowitz,  H. (1952), “PORTFOLIO SELECTION*”, The Journal of Finance , Vol.  7/1, pp.  77-91, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540 -6261.1952.tb01525.x . [19] 
Moody’s (2006), Lessons Learned in Moody’s Experience in Evaluating Corporate Governance 
at Major North American Issuers . [57] 
NGFS (2019), A Sustainable and Responsible Investment Guide for Central Banks’ Portfolio 
Management . [48] 
OECD (2019), Social I mpact Investment 2019: The Impact Imperative for Sustainable 
Development . [51] 
OECD (2018), OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Business Conduct . [49] 
OECD (2017), Investment governance and the integration of environmental, social and 
governance factors . [43] 
OECD (1999), Corporate governance: effects on firm performance and economic growth. , 
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.218490 . [56] 
OECD, MSCI (2018), Institutional investing for SDGs: A Joint Discussion Paper from MSCI and 
the OECD . [50] 
OECD, The World bank, UN Environment (2018), Financing Climate Futures . [53] 
Orlitzky,  M., F.  Schmidt and S.  Rynes (2003), “Corporate Social and Financial Performance: A 
Meta -Analysis”, Organization Studies , Vol.  24/3, pp.  403-441, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.11 77/0170840603024003910 . [7] 
Research,  B. (2018), Sustainable Investing and Bond Returns. . [40] 
Russell Investments (2018), Materiality Matters: Targeting ESG Issues that can affect 
performance – the material ESG score . [30] 
Serafeim,  G. (2018), “Public Sentiment and the Price of Corporate Sustainability”, SSRN 
Electronic Journal , http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3265502 . [17] 
State Street Global Advisors (2019), The ESG Data Challenge . [33] 
Task Force on Climate -related Finan cial Disclosures (2017), Final Report: Recommendations by 
the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures . [28] 
Taskforce on Climate -related Financial Disclosures (2017), Recommendations of the TCFD . [26] 
UN PRI and ICGN (2018), A Discussion Pape r By Global Investor Organisations On Corporate 
ESG Reporting. . [31] 
   71 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  UN Principles for Responsible Investment, (2019), What is Responsible Investment . [27] 
Verrecchia,  R. (1983), “Discretionary disclosure”, Journal of Accounting and Economics , Vol.  5, 
pp. 179-194, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0165 -4101(83)90011 -3. [44] 
Wang,  Q., J.  Dou and S.  Jia (2016), “A Meta -Analytic Review of Corporate Social Responsibility 
and Corporate Financial Performance”, Business & Society , Vol.  55/8, pp.  1083 -1121, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0007650315584317 . [9] 
World Economic Forum (2019), Seeking Return on ESG . [46] 
World Economic Forum,  I. (2019), Seeking Return on ESG: Advancing the Reporting Ecosystem 
to Unlock Impact for Business and Society.  [32] 
 
 
72    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  ESG financial ecosystem  
Further assessment of the ESG financial economist warrants a review of various other bodies and 
organisations that continue to influence the  development of ESG metrics and methodologies. A number of 
stock exchanges have provided gui dance on ESG disclosures. The FASB, the National Institute of Investor 
Relations, and many bodies that focus specifically on one of the themes (E, S, or G) help shape this through 
discussions with practitioners. Other players also provide such guidance, to  help ease the disclosure 
process.  
These framers and influencers are highlighted because, they (and others not mentioned) have both 
advanced the awareness and policy relevance of the use of information and data that is material for 
investors to consider f or long -term investing, for both social and financial returns. As well, the reporting 
standards are still considered a work in progress, as there is not sufficient international harmonisation such 
that assessors – be they raters or investors – do not have an agreed upon approach for what metrics and 
submetrics related to ESG approaches are sufficient to enhance shareholder and creditor value. This 
differs significantly from the assessment of credit rating, for example, where the key metrics for ratings has 
been well -established and there is a wide body of empirical literature demonstrating the alignment of 
metrics, criteria, ratings, and incidents of downgrade and default. It is for this reason – predictability – that 
credit ratings have been relied upon for  decades, even despite some periods where the predictability has 
underwhelmed markets (e.g. during the Global Financial Crisis, particularly with respect to structured 
products that had much less track record of predictability).  
Guidelines and principles.   Without purpose, frameworks would be little more than a shell. While not the 
focus of this piece, the underlying driver of such frameworks are standards and principles that are grounded 
in a broader concept of sustainability with respect to societal valu es related to the environment, human 
rights, gender equality, and other related issues. They are provided by ethical standard setters, which are 
distinct from standard setters of industry practice, such as disclosure. On this topic, examples of these 
stand ard setters include international organisations such as the OECD, the United Nations, and the World 
Bank. has a number of standards relevant to the broader ESG effort.  
The OECD has several standards that are embedded, explicitly or implicitly, in the ESG p rocess:  
OECD Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Business Conduct;  
OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict -Affected and 
High-Risk Areas;  
OECD Principles for Corporate Governance; and,  
OECD Guidelines for Mul tinational Enterprises.  
These responsible investment guidelines collectively provide guidance to companies and investors with 
how to operationalise theme to ensure that minimum standards related to human rights, fair treatment of 
workers, supply chains, ge nder diversity, among many related issues.  Also, the principles for corporate 
governance give high level guidance to oversight authorities and issuers evaluate and improve the legal, 
regulatory, and institutional framework for corporate governance, with a  view to supporting economic 
efficiency, sustainable growth and financial stability. For example, the principles explicitly state that in 
addition to their commercial objectives, companies are encouraged to disclose policies and performance 
   73 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  relating to bu siness ethics, the environment and, where material to the company, social issues, human 
rights and other public policy commitments; and, that issuers should disclose foreseeable risks with respect 
to the environment.77 
Also, principles offered by the United  Nations 
are being used to help align long -term 
shareholder value with societal values, 
where investment objectives chose to 
incorporate them. Such principles include  
UN Global Compact, which includes ten 
principles that draw from UN principles on 
Labor, H uman Rights, Environment, and 
Anti-corruption;  
UN Sustainability Development Goals 
(SDGs), are a set of 17 global goals focused 
on sustainable -development themes ranging 
from poverty, equality, education, climate 
change, infrastructure, land and water. 
These factors are gaining traction as an 
organising framework for global asset 
owners to utilise for approaches to thematic 
investment.  
Some of these principles that incorporate 
societal values, such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and th e UN Global Compact, 
form part of the widely used metrics in ESG investing, whereas others such as the UN SDGs, are meant 
to be aspirational goals that are part of impact investing.  
Bodies that set rules and requirements.  ESG facilitators include those bod ies who engage with market 
participants and set expectations, guidelines and rules for ESG disclosure. Exchanges are important actors 
in this regard, particularly where they are now providing specific guidance on ESG disclosure, including 
listing rules. At  the current time, a number of regulators serve as facilitators, and in some jurisdictions, 
particularly in the European Union, taxonomies and specific guidance are being developed that would 
elevate such roles to more formal standards. As it is not the pu rpose of this report to assess the role of 
regulators or regulation being developed regarding ESG approaches, the report will not reflect upon recent 
efforts by national, supranational regulators and international bodies of regulators to formalise guidance  
on ESG approaches.   
ESG framing, guidance and oversight.  Loosely defined,  ESG framing, guidance and oversight includes 
an array of enabling actors that influence and help broadly define forward -looking, non -financial reporting. 
They do so by determining what is material to the long -term sustainability of the business, and also its 
interaction with broader issues of sustainability aligned with the global economy and financial system, the 
environment, and society, including social values such as human right s. These such institutions include, 
at a minimum, a web of issuer information disclosure bodies at national and international levels; 
exchanges, self -regulating bodies, and related industry associations, oversight authorities, such as 
markets regulators, a nd bank and pensions supervisors; and, international organisations that set standards 
and guidelines regarding responsible investing and sustainability goals. While the many institutions that 
engage in the ecosystem beyond issuers and investors can help br ing relevance, substance and different 
perspectives, the current state of development merits further attention to ensure this potential benefits are 
achieved in practice.  

74    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Examples of disclosure organisations  include:  
The Sustainability Accounting Standards  Board (SASB),  which provides guidance to guide materiality 
of metrics across industries, which in turn are used by ESG assessors.  
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) , an international independent standards organisation, provides specific 
standards of report ing key sustainability metrics by industry, based on engagement with a host of 
stakeholders and standard setters on sustainability issues.  
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) is a global coalition of regulators, investors, 
companies, standar d setters, the accounting profession, academia and NGOs. The coalition promotes 
communication about value creation as the next step in the evolution of corporate reporting.  
The Taskforce for Climate -related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), under the auspices of the Financial 
Stability Board, developed a set of key recommendations for the disclosure of climate -related financial 
disclosures considered to be material to investors and lenders.  
Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB) is an international non -profit organisation working to 
provide material information for investors and financial markets through the integration of climate change -
related information into mainstream financial reporting.  
International Corporate Governance Network (ICGN) is to promote ef fective standards of corporate 
governance and investor stewardship to advance efficient markets and sustainable economies world -wide.  
The Corporate Reporting Dialogue (CRD)78, is a set of 8 providers of standards for corporate reporting, 
and includes traditional financial reporting bodies and those that address non -financial disclosure, such as 
several bodies listed above.  
 
   75 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Methodology  
The efficient frontier: Markowitz Modern P ortfolio Theory  
The Markowitz Portfolio optimis ation model tries to identify the best complete portfolio by allocating to the 
optimal risky portfolio and the risk -free asset. It does so assuming that investors are risk averse and that, 
given equal returns, an investor would prefer the one with less ris k. The portfolio construction is based on 
two phases: The first step is to identify the minimum -variance frontier of risky assets. The second part is 
to search for the capital allocation line with the highest Sharpe ratio.  
The frontier represents the lowe st variance that can be attained for a given portfolio expected return. Assets 
that lie inside of the minimum variance frontier are inefficient. The upper part of the Minimum Variance 
Frontier is the Efficient Frontier, given the fact that they have a high er expected return for the same level 
of risk of the lower part of the frontier. Diversification plays an important role as the sole way of reducing 
risk. 
Some assumptions are necessary for the model to work:  
1. No transaction costs and no taxes  
2. An investor h as a chance to take any position of any size and in any security. The market liquidity 
is infinite and no one can move the market.  
3. Investors are rational and risk adverse. They are aware of all the risk contained in investment and 
actually take positions based on the risk determination demanding a higher return for accepting 
greater volatility.  
4. The risk -return relationships are viewed over the same time horizon.  
5. Investors share identical views on risk measurement. All the investors are provided by informa tion 
and their sale or purchase depends on an identical assessment of the investment and all have the 
same expectations from the investment.  
6. Investors seek to control risk only by diversification.  
An important part of the theory regards constraints. Some i nvestors could be subject to limitations, for 
example an institution could be prohibited from taking short positions in any asset, even thou it is not the 
only kind of constraints. An efficient frontier built subject to extra constraints will offer a Sharp e ratio inferior 
to that of a less constrained one. Investors should be aware of this cost and should carefully consider 
imposing constraints.  
In order to compute the efficient frontier we selected different ESG and non -ESG indices by different 
providers ( as reported: MSCI, STOXX and Thomson Reuters)  among the most prominent ones . We then 
compute the monthly  price  returns  ((P2-P1)/P1)  for each index and calculate the average  return and the 
standard deviation. We then create a Variance -Covariance matrix usin g the different indices . This allows 
us to identify the best and worst indices in terms of Sharpe Ratio and to create the efficient frontier.  
76    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  Fama & French 5 factors model  
First, we gather monthly price returns for companies that have an ESG score in May 2019 through the 
Thomson Reuters database for the past 10 years (July 2009 to May 2019) for different regions. All data 
are collected in US dollars.   
Second, we divide the companies  using a best -in-class approach and selecting the top and bottom 20% 
compan ies with an ESG rating in 2019. We then retrieve the  monthly price  returns  ((P2-P1)/P1) of each 
company from Datastream (Refinitiv). The following step is to average the returns among the bucket of 
companies (representing our ESG portfolio) that we have co llected. This allows us to have returns of a 
portfolio comparable to a benchmark.  
Third, we download the data for benchmarking from the Kennet R. French website. For example, when 
analysing the US region, we download the 5 factors data for the US.  The data set provides five columns of 
raw data. The first three are Market, Small minus Big ( difference between the returns of small cap firms 
and large cap firms) and High minus Low ( difference between the returns of high book -to-market firms and 
low book -to-market firms) . The last two were added afterwards and are Conservative minus Aggressive 
(difference between the returns of firms that invest conservatively and firms that invest aggressively ) and 
Robust minus Weak ( difference between the returns of  firms with robust (high) and weak (low) operating 
profitability ). 
We then run a regre ssion analysis to  identify the significance of the different factors taken into account. 
The equation is the following:  
Alpha  = R(p)-[R(f)+β*(R(m) -R(f)) +β*SMB+β*HML+β*RM W+β*CMA+ ϵ] 
The intercept in the graph represents the Jensen’s Alpha after taking into account for the risks identified 
by the other factors. This allows us to extract a risk -adjusted Alpha.  We do the same for the single pillars: 
E, S and G to measure how t hey each perform.  We chose the US as main market because of the large 
coverage of ESG ratings in the region.  
Portfolio analysis  
Regarding the portfolio analysis a similar data gathering approach is adopted. We collect price data from 
Datastream for each company with an ESG score in 2019. Then we divide the companies, but instead of 
using a percentile approach, we rather divide them  based on their current ESG score. This creates five 
buckets of companies (five portfolios) with ratings from 0 -20, 20 -40, 40 -60, 60 -80 and 80 -100. This was 
done in order to have a clearer view of how each bucket would perform following the Fama and French  
analysis. We then compute the average return of each portfolio and after subtracting the risk -free rate we 
divide it by the standard deviation of the portfolio. This allows us to compute the Sharpe Ratio, a measure 
of the performance of the portfolio anal ysed.  
ESG Rating by provider  
ESG rating by Thomson Reuters and Bloomberg on companies that are part of the S&P500 in 2019.  
   77 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
    
  
Source: Refinitiv, Bloomberg, OECD calculations  
Issuer Credit rating by provider  
Issuer credit rating by Moody’s, S&P and Fitch on companies that are part of the S&P500 in 2019.  
  

78    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
Source: Moody’s, Fitch, S&P, OECD calculations  
Empirical Analysis details  
Fundamental  analysis  
Descrip tive statistics  
 World  #: 6586  
   US #: 2384  
   
Variable
: Mean  Median  SD Min Max  Mean  Median  SD Min Max  
ESG 50.62  49.88  17.85  4.85  95.81  46.48  43.15  16.75  4.85  92.66  
ENV  50.73  49.18  22.86  3.02  99.42  43.21  37.78  21.09  4.41  98.80  
SOC 50.79  50.43  21.48  2.23  99.03  46.07  43.41  18.82  2.23  97.81  
GOV  50.26  50.32  21.25  2.42  98.59  50.59  50.67  21.35  6.38  98.58  
 EU #: 1300  
   JPN #: 434  
   
Variable
: Mean  Median  SD Min Max  Mean  Median  SD Min Max  
ESG 58.87  59.79  16.32  12.04  95.81  55.01  57.84  18.59  10.84  92.25  
ENV  63.75  64.86  20.04  9.18  99.42  62.15  64.17  20.90  11.98  98.81  
SOC 62.07  64.06  19.62  6.75  99.03  52.23  56.47  24.25  4.17  96.17  
GOV  49.73  49.63  21.23  2.42  96.16  50.29  51.41  21.37  5.39  94.79  
 

   79 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
  2013 -2018:  
18/13  0-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90-100 
 
0-10 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 
10-20 1 38 19 7 1 1 0 0 0 0 67 
20-30 1 37 92 44 9 3 1 1 0 0 188 
30-40 0 25 117 133 42 17 4 0 0 0 338 
40-50 1 21 101 187 143 54 16 2 0 0 525 
50-60 0 9 73 163 209 183 62 12 2 0 713 
60-70 0 9 24 78 162 230 230 81 9 0 823 
70-80 1 2 10 22 47 125 205 185 55 0 652 
80-90 0 0 0 4 6 14 47 138 101 9 319 
90-100 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 4 16 5 29 
 4 142 436 639 619 628 568 423 183 14 3656  
            
Worst:  453 12% 
Better:  2093  57% 
Same:  1110  30% 
Fundamental Ratios:  
ESG score:  Thomson Reuters ESG Score is an overall company score based on the self -reported 
information in the environmental, social and corporate governance pillars.  
ROE: Calculated as the Income Available to Common Excluding Extraordinary Items for the fiscal period 
divided by the same period Average Common Equity and is expressed as a percentage. Average Common 
Equity is the average of the Common Equity at the beginning and the end of the year.  
Price/Earnings: This is the ratio of fiscal period Price Close to EPS Excluding Extraordinary Items, Avg. 
Diluted Shares Outstanding for the same period. A security's price divided by its Earnings Per Share mean 
estimate.  
P/B: A security's price divided by its Book Value Per Share mean estimate.  
 
80    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
 
 
1 (Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, 2018 [25]) 
2 For example, the FT Lexicon provides a helpful explanation of ESG: “ESG (environmental, social and 
governance) is a generic term  used in capital markets and used by investors to evaluate corporate 
behaviour and to determine the future financial performance of companies. ESG factors are a subset of 
non-financial performance indicators which include sustainable, ethical and corporate  governance issues 
such as managing the company’s carbon footprint and ensuring there are systems in place to ensure 
accountability.”  
3 FSB’s (Taskforce on Climate -related Financial Disclosures, 2017 [26]), “Recommendations of t he TCFD”, 
notes that, because the transition to a lower -carbon economy requires significant and, in some cases, 
disruptive changes across economic sectors and industries in the near term, financial policymakers are 
interested in the implications for the gl obal financial system, especially in terms of avoiding financial 
dislocations and sudden losses in asset values.  
4 (UN Principles for Responsible Investment,, 2019 [27]), “What is Responsible Investment?”  
5 Here, societal values  broadly relates to investors’ collective moral values and beliefs, and could be 
conceptualised as aligning with the UN Sustainable Development Goals. However, some forms may align 
more specifically with desire to limit use of weapons, gambling, tobacco, e tc.  
6 Over the past several years, numerous ESG investor surveys have been conducted. In a 2017 ESG 
survey published by the CFA Institute, 73% of investor respondents said they take ESG issues into account 
in their investment analysis and decisions.  
7 This will be further explored in Section 5 of the document, based on research of returns from sell -side 
strategists.  
8 Definitions and categorisations differ across market institutions. Morningstar, for example, makes a 
differentiation between funds that “con sider” ESG factors although sustainability is not central, and ESG 
focus, which has an explicit asset selection based on ESG criteria. In this respect, the distinction between 
ESG consideration funds and traditional investing may further merge as practices  and standards further 
develop; for example, CFA Institute's position statement, released in 2018, states that it “encourages all 
investment professionals to consider ESG factors, where relevant, as an important part of the analytical 
and investment decisi on-making process, regardless of investment style, asset class, or investment 
approach."  
9 (ICI, 2020 [52])“ Funds’ Use of ESG Integration and Sustainable Investing Strategies: An Introduction.”  
  Notes  
   81 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
10 An additional point of ambiguity is that Socially Responsibl e Investing, which seeks to incorporate ethics 
and social concerns into portfolios, and Sustainable and Responsible Investing, which incorporates ESG 
metrics to enhance risk management and long -term value, both use the acronym SRI.  
11 US SIF (2018), “Sustai nable and Responsible Investing.”  
12 Morgan Stanley (2018),  “Sustainable  Investment  Asset  Owner  Survey.”  
13 BNP (2019),” The ESG Global Survey 2019”.  
14 Bank of America Merrill Lynch (2018), “The ABCs of ESG.”  
15 Current energy, transport, building and water infrastructure make up more than 60% of global 
greenhouse gas emissions.  
16  (OECD, The World bank, UN Environment, 2018 [53]) “Financing Climate Futures,” published under the 
responsibility of the Secretary -General of the OECD.  
17 (NGFS, 2019 [48]) “A Sustainable and Responsible Investment Guide for Central Banks’ Portfolio 
Management.”  
18 (OECD, 2018 [49]) “OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Business Conduct.”  
19 For further information, see  (OECD, MSCI, 2 018 [50]) “Institutional Investing for SDGs: A Joint Discussion 
Paper from MSCI and the OECD.”  
20 Work has been underway at the OECD with respect to the issues and challenges associated with ESG 
investing and fiduciary duties, particularly with respect to pe nsion plans, and includes guidance by the 
IOPS (international organisation of pensions supervisors). See  (IOPS, 2019 [54]) “Supervisory guidelines on 
the integration of ESG factors in the investment and risk management of pension funds.” Thus, topics 
relate d to fiduciary duty will not be covered further by this report.  
21 See NGFS (2019), “A Sustainable and Responsible Investment Guide for Central Banks’ Portfolio 
Management.”  
22 See, for example, the three European Supervisory Authorities (EBA, EIOPA and ESMA  - ESAs), 
Consultation on ESG disclosures, April 2020.  
23 See (IOSCO, 2020 [55]) “Sustainable Finance and the Role of Securities Regulators and IOSCO.”  
24 See The World Federation of Exchanges (2020), “Sixth annual sustainability survey.”  
25 https://business.nasdaq.com/media/Nasdaq -ESG -Reporting -Guide -2019_tcm5044 -70227.pdf  
26 Ibid. 
27 See (OECD, 1999 [56]) “Corporate governance: effects on firm performance and economic growth.” See 
also G20/OECD Principles for Corporate Governance.  
28 See (Moody's, 2006 [57]) “Lessons Learned in Moody’s Experience in Evaluating Corporate Governance 
at Major North American Iss uers.”  
29 For example, see S&P (2020), “The Big Picture on Climate Risk” suggests that over 60% of S&P 500 
entities (with a market capitalisation of USD  18 trillion) hold assets that are at high risk of at least one type 
of climate -change physical risk.  
30 See BNP (2019), “The ‘S’ of ESG – Part 1: A challenging factor.”  
31 Invesco (2020), “Why the ‘S’ in ESG matters, ” Invesco Global ESG Team; see also Franklin Templeton 
(2020),        “ ‘Build Back Better’: COVID -19 Brings the “S” From ESG Into Focus.”  
 
82    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
32 For an assessment of climate risk and financial materiality, see CDSB (2018), “Position paper: Materiality 
and climate - related financial disclosures.”  
33 SASB references metrics already in use by industry, from more than 200 entities  such as WHO, CDP, 
EPA, OS HA and industry organisations such as ICAO, IPIECA, EPRI and GRESB.  
34 See (Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures, 2017 [28]), “Final Report: Recommendations 
by the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures.” The framework has sought to integrate 
reporting assessment and standards from a range of relevant bodies, including Climate Disclosure 
Standards Board, SASB, and others.  
35 (Climate Disclosure Standards Board, 2012 [29]), “Climate Change Reporting Framewo rk Advancing and 
aligning disclosure of climate change - related information in mainstream reports.”  The Climate Disclosures 
Standards Board (CDSB) issued a Climate Change Reporting Framework, published in 2012, which sought 
to align with the objective of f inancial reporting, which is to provide information about the reporting 
organisation that is useful for equity investors, lenders and other creditors in their investment and lending 
decision -making process.  
36 (Russell Investments, 2 018 [30]), “Materiality Matters: Targeting ESG Issues that can affect performance 
– the material ESG score.”  
37 (Khan, Serafeim and Yoon, 2015 [14]), “Corporate Sustainability: First Evidence on Materiality”  
38 (UN PRI and ICGN, 2018 [31]) UN PRI and ICGN (2018), “A Discussion Paper By Global Investor 
Organisations On Corporate ESG Reporting.”  
39 The FSB created the Task Force on Climate -related Financial Disclosures, cha ired by Michael 
Bloomberg, to strengthen this challenging aspect of ESG disclosures, develop voluntary, consistent 
climate -related financial risk disclosures for use by companies in providing information to investors, 
lenders, insurers, and other stakehold ers. The Task Force considers the physical, liability and transition 
risks associated with climate change and what constitutes effective financial disclosures across industries.  
40 (World Economic Forum, 2019 [32]), in collabora tion with Allianz and Boston Consulting Group (2019), 
“Seeking Return on ESG: Advancing the Reporting Ecosystem to Unlock Impact for Business and Society.”  
41 https://morphicasset.com/esg -ratings -no-quick -fixes/ , referring to CLSA, GPIF  
42 (State Street Global Advisors, 2019 [33]), “The ESG Data Challenge.”  
43 See https://www.wsj.com/articles/is -tesla -or-exxon -more -sustainable -it-depends -whom -you-ask-
1537199931  
44 These firms were chosen in large part because they have publicly available methodological overviews, 
they are widely used, and the OECD has acc ess to their commercially available ESG data.  
45 GRI defines materiality as having impact, which is the effect an organisation has on economic, 
environmental and society, which in turn can contribute to sustainable development, and factors that are 
importan t to stakeholders. This differs from the traditional concept of financial materiality in corporate 
finance, which is a subset of this definition.  
In this regard, identifiable economic performance such as sales and impact on human rights are both 
considered  high in terms of materiality. See (GRI, 2018 [34]), “The Materiality Principle: The Deep Dive.”  
46 United Nations Global Compact (UN Global Compact): “The Global Compact asks companies to 
embrace, support and enact, within their  sphere of influence, a set of core values in the areas of human 
rights, labour and environmental standards, and the fight against corruption.  
47 (J.P. Morgan, 2016 [35]), “ESG, Environmental, Social and Governance Investing”; mak es a particular 
distinction between exclusion and norms -based investing.  
 
   83 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
48 See (BNP, 2018 [36]), “Investing for tomorrow: applying ESG principles to emerging market debt.”  
49 (Cerulli and UN PRI, 2019 [37]), “Survey: Responsible Investment in Hedge Funds -The Growing 
Importance of Impact and Legacy.”  
50 (Bos, 2017 [38]), “Sustainability Scores for Investment Funds,” CFA Institute Magazine.  
51 Ibid. 
52 (J.P. Morgan, 2016 [12]), “ESG Investing: A quantitative perspective on how ESG can enhance your 
portfolio.”  
53 Moreover, under the voluntary disclosure theory, (Verrecchia, 1983 [44]) and (Dye, 1985 [45]) firms with a 
large involvement in sustainability will report extensively while those that are not involved will report the 
minimal amount necessary.  
54 Supporting the findings mentioned,  Ciciretti, Dalo and Dam (2017) published a paper aimed at identifying 
the drivers of SRI. They find evidence supporting what they call the taste effect, which entails the exclusion 
of stocks from the portfolio based purely on the taste for such assets, an d an associated underperformance 
at 4.8% annually.  
55 The four papers developed use MSCI data, ESG ratings and indices to provide a complete analysis on 
ESG investing:  
Part 1: How ESG Affects Equity Valuation, Risk and Performance (The Journal of Portfolio 
Management) (Giese et  al., 2019 [22]): the research seeks the correlation between ESG and Corporate 
Financial Performance, through the analysis of transmission channels.  
Part 2: Consistent ESG integrati on through ESG benchmarks:  the research provides a framework at 
various strategic levels, from the top policy benchmark level to the performance benchmark of individual 
allocations.  
Part 3: Performance and Risk Analysis of Index -Based ESG Portfolios (The J ournal of Index 
Investing) (Giese et  al., 2019 [23]): provides an insight on how asset owners can implement ESG through 
index -based allocations to portfolios that seek to replicate ESG indexes.  
Part 4: Integrating ESG Into Factor Strategies And Active Portfolios:  The research provides a 
methodology based on a two -step approach, where a standard factor methodology is applied on top of an 
ESG index, and a one -step approach, where the strategy is optimised to minimise the sacrifice in factor 
exposure per unit of ESG improvement  
56 (Bannier, Bofinger and Rock, 2019 [18]) : Doing safe by doing good: ESG investing and corporate social 
responsibility in the U. S. and Europe, CFS Working Paper Series, No. 621, Goethe University, Center for 
Financial Studies (CFS), Frankfurt a. M., http://nbn -resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:hebis:30:3 -480587  
57 https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/new -energy -landscape -folder/esg -revolution -
rising/report.pdf  
58 Fama and French provide five different factors, among which is the market factor. This factor represen ts 
a proxy of the market. When adding the others factors, the result is a risk -weighted performance measure.  
59 More details on the methodology are provided on Appendix B . 
60 Previous research from (Dolvin, Fulkerson and Krukover, 2017 [24]), focused on the efficiency of 
sustainable funds and how they perform using Morningstar sustainable metrics. As a result of the analysis, 
they found no difference in risk adjusted returns of ESG funds against non ESG f unds returns. However, 
they find a relevant difference in risk profile, with high Sustainability scores largely confined to large cap 
funds.  
 
84    
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
61 “How Does European Sustainable Funds' Performance Measure Up?” Morningstar, 2020 
www.morningstar.com/content/dam/marketing/emea/shared/guides/ESG_Fund_Performance_2020.pdf   
62 Green bond standards are also being developed, but are not covered in this repor t. 
63 See European Commission, “Overview of Sustainable Finance” website. More specifically, 
environmental considerations may refer to climate change mitigation and adaptation, as well as the 
environment more broadly, such as the preservation of biodiversit y, pollution prevention and circular 
economy. Sustainable finance at EU level aims at supporting the delivery on the objectives of the European 
Green Deal by channelling private investment into the transition to a climate -neutral, climate -resilient, 
resour ce-efficient and just economy, as a complement to public money.  
64 ESMA (2020), Strategy on Sustainable Finance.  
65 Government Accountability Office (2020), “PUBLIC COMPANIES: Disclosure of Environmental, Social, 
and Governance Factors and Options to Enhance  Them.” GAO -20-530. 
66 Ibid. 
67 See SEC (2020), “SEC Release Nos. IC –33809; File No. S7 -04-20 RIN 3235 -AM72 Request for 
Comments on Fund Names.” https://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2020/ic -33809.p df 
68 See Finalisation of Japan’s Stewardship Code (Second revised version) on JFSA website, and Asian 
Development Bank (2020), “Sustainable Finance in Japan.”  
69 See GAO (2020).  
70 See https://www.jpx.co.jp/english/corporate/sustainability/esg -investment/handbook/index.html   
71 Market participants suggest that (i) preferences for data availability vs completeness have influenced 
different ESG reporting fra meworks, and (ii) perspectives on this balance can range by industry.  
72 This approach is constructive to support relevance and prioritisation of ESG metrics. However, the fact 
that SASB gives very low prioritisation of any of the environmental metric categ ories as related to the 
financial sector or any of its industries, despite the fact that medium -term climate risks – physical and 
transition – are being given heightened attention by banks, insurance and asset managers, raises 
questions about the timeframe  of financial materiality.  
73 The OECD has used ratings of major ESG raters as a proxy for how investors assess ESG factors of 
firms. Given the time intensity to collect and assess the data from individual firms, it is likely that all but the 
ESG raters and  the largest institutional investors have the resources to thoroughly assess smaller firms, 
based both on firm disclosure and industry information. As such, it is possible that the overall bias is even 
greater than what is illustrated in rating agency ESG ratings across large and small firms.  
74 See https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2019/11/26/2019 -ESG -Reporting -Guide.pdf . NASDAQ  created a 
short  list of what it considered to be “the most pervasive and persuasive ESG metrics —the Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs)” that it believes provide the greatest insight into the sustainability 
performance of the greatest number of companies.  
75 For example, in 2020 MSCI made public the MSCI ESG Fund Ratings for 36  000 multi -asset class 
mutual funds and ETFs, and MSCI Limited has made public ESG metrics for all of its indexes covered by 
the European Union (EU)  Benchmark Regulation. The ESG rating s and metrics are available as part of 
two new search tools now available to anyone on the MSCI website. The launch is part of a wider ESG 
transparency initiative to provide consistent and comparable ESG metrics at the company, fund and index 
level. This f ollows the release of the MSCI ESG Ratings of over 2  800 issuers in November last year and 
is part of MSCI’s ongoing effort to encourage and support investors to integrate ESG considerations 
throughout their investment processes.  
 
   85 
ESG INVESTING: PRACT ICES, PROGRESS AND C HALLENGES © OECD 202 0 
   
76 See (World Economic Forum, 2019 [46]), “Seeking Return on ESG,” which raises observations about the 
level of opacity that hinders comparability to the level desired by a number of market participants.  
77 OECD (201 5), G20/OECD Pri nciples of Corporate Go vernance.  
78 Members include: The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB), 
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), International 
Organization for Standardisation (ISO), Internati onal Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), International 
Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) and The Sustainability Accounting Standards Board.  
www.oecd.org/finance/financial-markets /